Zane Putnina | PhD programme in Heritage Studies
Supervisor: Prof. Dr. Christer Petersen
Revised and updated Research Proposal
January 2022



         Digital Cultural Heritage and The Local Time Machine Project Network.

                                  A Conceptual Framework.

Digital Cultural Heritage is a new and rising subfield within the larger field of Digital
Humanities. The definitions of Digital Humanities are many (for examples see - Schreibman,
Siemens, and Unsworth 2004; Klein and Gold, 2016; Schreibman, Siemens, and Unsworth
2016.) but at-large can be summed up to “[..] work [..] done at the intersection of
computational methods and humanities materials” (Drucker 2021, p1). The Time Machine
Organization (TMO) can be said to be the largest collaborative endeavour within the field of
Digital Cultural Heritage up to date, holding the long-term vision of using historical sources to
speculatively recreate past periods of time in a 4D Mirror World (Time Machine Manifesto
2019, Kaplan and Di Lenardo 2020). This research project will a) provide a conceptual history
of digital Cultural Heritage, its contemporary characteristics and introduce the landscape of
its’ key players, explaining why this research projects’ main focus will lay on the TMO; b)
structurally analyse the building blocks of TMO, the Local Time Machine (LTM) projects, as
they perform the move of analogue heritage memory sources into digital environments and
b) investigate the implications thereof for the neighbouring knowledge fields of History,
Memory and Media, as well as Heritage Studies.


Western human societies are currently undergoing a massive revolution in terms of
knowledge production. Within the humanities, literary critic and media theorist Katherine
Hayles has noted the ongoing “momentous shift from print to digital media” (Hayles 2012, 7)
and further explored how digital media influences the reading and writing of texts. Within the
field of digital Cultural Heritage, recent literature on the shift from heritage to digital Cultural
Heritage include collections of theoretical writings on topics related to the concept (Cameron
and Kenderdine 2007; Parry 2007; Kalay et al. 2008; Lewi et al. 2019), the field investigated as
to its practitioners and its relationship to Digital Humanities (Münster 2017; Münster et al.
2019), applications, problems and solutions discussed by practitioners (for example, in the
Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage), as well as a recent broad reflection on digital


                                                 1
heritage in the age of more-than-human world (Cameron 2021). To the best of my
knowledge, there is yet a comprehensive account of the history and contemporary uses,
characteristics, and key-players of the concept of digital Cultural Heritage yet to be
conducted. It is also crucially important to map and document exactly how this slow
revolution from analogue to a world of digital Cultural Heritage is happening to be conscious
about what is being gained as well as lost in the digital making and experiencing of heritage
and the implications thereof.


Firstly, it is needed to understand the conceptual thinking thus far as to what has been and is
digital Cultural Heritage, what is the TMO and LTM projects´ role within. Secondly, to develop
an understanding of how the move from analogue to digital heritage worlds is happening and
how digital Cultural Heritage differs from previous heritage memory environments. Thirdly, to
investigate how the coming digital Cultural Heritage 4D Mirror World will change the
neighbouring knowledge fields of History, Memory and Media, as well as Heritage Studies.


The ensuing guiding Research Questions are as follows -

    1. What is the history of the digital Cultural Heritage concept? What are the fields
        current key characteristics and players? What is the role of TMO within the
        landscape?
    2. In the context of digital Cultural Heritage and LTM projects – who is doing the
        creating, with what kinds of tools and access practices, filled with what kind of
        content? How do all these aspects differ from previous media modes of heritage
        memory construction – their (mainly) analogue sources?
    3. What are the implications thereof from the perspective of the neighbouring
        knowledge fields of History, Memory and Media, as well as Heritage Studies?


This project will use theoretical and methodological triangulation to gain most holistic
understanding of this interdisciplinary research problem – conceptual history, content
analysis, structurally analytical concept of “Travelling Memories”, survey questionnaire, semi-
structured interviews and, lastly, the Broad Model for interdisciplinary research.


A conceptual history of digital Cultural Heritage will be conducted in order to understand the
development and current definitions, characteristics and key contemporary players of the
field. Content analysis will be conducted on the available TMO and LTM related documents to
map the origins of the endeavour and the LTM projects’ development and role within. In


                                               2
order to map, structurally analyze and understand the move and the implications of the move
from analogue to digital media in heritage memory environments, the concept of “Travelling
Memory” (Erll 2011) will be used to investigate how the a) carriers, b) media, c) content
stories, d) practices of access and lastly c) symbols used within LTM projects have altered
from their analogue sources. A survey questionnaire will be used to gain first-hand
information about these travels of the LTM projects. To deepen the analysis, semi-structured
interviews will be conducted with selected LTM project case examples. Lastly, the research
results and their implications will be inspected from the perspectives of History, Memory and
Media, as well as Heritage Studies using the Broad Model for interdisciplinary research
(Repko, Szostak and Buchberger 2017).


This project will provide new knowledge-based insights and result in a comprehensive study
on digital Cultural Heritage and the largest contemporary collaborative endeavour within the
field. Analytical insights will be provided in the form of a map that records the move of
analogue heritage memory sources into digital environments and analysis of the implications
thereof. It will directly contribute to the TMO action Pillar One – the building of critical theory
for digital Cultural Heritage.




                                                3
Tentative Bibliography


   1. Cameron, Fiona R., and Sarah Kenderdine, eds. 2007. Theorizing Digital Cultural
      Heritage: A Critical Discourse. Media in Transition. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
   2. Cameron, Fiona R. 2021. The Future of Digital Data, Heritage and Curation: In a More-
      than-Human World. London and New York: Routledge.
   3. Drucker, Johanna. 2021. The Digital Humanities Coursebook: An Introduction to
      Digital Methods for Research and Scholarship. London and New York: Routledge.
   4. Erll, Astrid. 2011. “Travelling Memory.” Parallax 17 (4): 4–18.
   5. Kalay, Yehuda, Thomas Kvan, Janice Affleck. 2008. New Heritage. New Media and
      Cultural Heritage. London and New York: Routledge.
   6. Kaplan, Frederic, and Isabella Di Lenardo. 2020. “The Advent of the 4D Mirror World.”
      Urban Planning 5 (2): 307–10.
   7. Klein, Lauren F. and Gold, Matthew K. 2016. Introduction: Digital Humanities: The
      Expanded Field. In Debates in the Digital Humanities 2016, edited by Gold Matthew K.
      and Klein Lauren F., Ix-Xvi. Minneapolis; London: University of Minnesota Press

   8. Lewi, Hannah, Wally Smith, Dirk vom Lehn, and Steven Cooke. 2019. The Routledge
      International Handbook of New Digital Practices in Galleries, Libraries, Archives,
      Museums and Heritage Sites. London and New York: Routledge.
   9. Münster, S. 2017. “A SURVEY ON TOPICS, RESEARCHERS AND CULTURES IN THE FIELD
      OF DIGITAL HERITAGE.” ISPRS Annals of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and
      Spatial Information Sciences IV-2/W2 (August): 157–62.
   10. Münster, S., F. I. Apollonio, P. Bell, P. Kuroczynski, I. Di Lenardo, F. Rinaudo, and R.
       Tamborrino. 2019. “DIGITAL CULTURAL HERITAGE MEETS DIGITAL HUMANITIES.”
       ISPRS - International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial
       Information Sciences XLII-2/W15 (August): 813–20.
   11. Parry, Ross. 2007. Recoding the Museum: Digital Heritage and the Technologies of
       Change. London and New York: Routledge.
   12. Repko, Allen F., Rick Szostak and Michelle P. Buchberger. 2017. Introduction to
       interdisciplinary studies. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks: SAGE

   13. Schreibman, Susan, Raymond George Siemens, and John Unsworth, eds. 2016. A New
       Companion to Digital Humanities. Hoboken: Wiley Blackwell.
   14. Schreibman, Susan, Raymond George Siemens, and John Unsworth, eds. 2004. A
       Companion to Digital Humanities. Hoboken: Wiley Blackwell.
   15. Time Machine. 2019. “Time Machine Manifesto. Big Data of the Past for the Future of
       Europe.” Vienna: Time Machine




                                                4
Tentative working plan



2022

January – April

    -   Conceptual history of DCH and its key characteristics
    -   Hand-in for revision

May – June

    -   History of TMO and LTM projects´ role within
    -   Hand-in for revision

July – August

    -   “Travelling Memory” concept structural analysis of LTM projects

September

    -   Semi-structured interviews with representative LTM case examples
    -   In-depth case analysis of representative LTM case examples
    -   Hand-in for revision

October – December

    -   Interdisciplinary analysis of implications for the fields of History, Memory, Media and
        Heritage Studies
    -   Hand-in for revision



2023

January – March

    -   Editing of the main text body

April – June

    -   Conclusions and discussion
    -   Introduction
    -   Formatting and proofreading
    -   Handing in for revision

August – September

    -   Last editing




                                               5
