     European Parliament
     2019-2024



                               Committee on Culture and Education




                                                                                   2020/2017(INI)

     30.7.2020




                 DRAFT REPORT
                 on artificial intelligence in education, culture and the audiovisual sector
                 (2020/2017(INI))


                 Committee on Culture and Education


                 Rapporteur: Sabine Verheyen




                 Rapporteur for the opinion (*):
                 Ondřej Kovařík, Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs


                 (*)     Associated committee – Rule 57 of the Rules of Procedure




     PR\1211077EN.docx                                                             PE655.862v01-00


EN                                       United in diversity                                         EN
     PR_INI

                                                     CONTENTS

                                                                                                              Page

     MOTION FOR A EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT RESOLUTION ...........................................3

     EXPLANATORY STATEMENT...........................................................................................7




     PE655.862v01-00                                       2/10                               PR\1211077EN.docx


EN
              MOTION FOR A EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT RESOLUTION


on artificial intelligence in education, culture and the audiovisual sector
(2020/2017(INI))


The European Parliament,

–     having regard to Article 167 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union,

–     having regard to the Commission report of 19 February 2020 to the European
      Parliament, the Council and the European Economic and Social Committee on the
      safety and liability implications of Artificial Intelligence, the Internet of Things and
      robotics (COM(2020)0064),

–     having regard to the Commission White Paper of 19 February 2020 entitled ‘Artificial
      Intelligence - A European approach to excellence and trust’ (COM(2020)0065),

–     having regard to the Commission communication of 19 February 2020 to the European
      Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the
      Committee of the Regions entitled ‘A European strategy for data’ (COM(2020)0066),

–     having regard to the Commission communication of 25 April 2018 entitled ‘Artificial
      Intelligence for Europe’ (COM(2018)0237),

–     having regard to the Commission communication of 17 January 2018 to the European
      Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the
      Committee of the Regions on the Digital Education Action Plan (COM(2018)0022),

–     having regard to its resolution of 12 February 2019 on a comprehensive European
      industrial policy on artificial intelligence and robotics1,

–     having regard to its resolution of 16 February 2017 with recommendations to the
      Commission on Civil Law Rules on Robotics2,

–     having regard to its resolution of 1 June 2017 on digitising European industry3,

–     having regard to its resolution of 11 September 2018 on language equality in the digital
      age4,

–     having regard to Rule 54 of its Rules of Procedure,

–     having regard to the opinions of the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home
      Affairs, the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection, the Committee
      on Legal Affairs and the Committee on Women’s Rights and Gender Equality,


1
  Texts adopted, P8_TA(2019)0081.
2
  OJ C 252, 18.7.2018, p. 239.
3
  OJ C 307, 30.8.2018, p. 163.
4
  OJ C 433, 23.12.2019, p. 42.

PR\1211077EN.docx                              3/10                              PE655.862v01-00


                                                                                                   EN
     –    having regard to the report of the Committee on Culture and Education (A9-0000/2020),

     A.   whereas artificial intelligence (AI) technologies are being developed at a fast pace, and
          are increasingly being used in education, culture and the audiovisual sector;

     B.   whereas the availability of high-quality and meaningful data is essential for the
          development of AI;

     C.   whereas the use of AI raises many concerns regarding the ethics and transparency of
          data collection, use and dissemination; whereas the benefits and risks of AI in these
          sectors must be carefully assessed;

     D.   whereas high-quality, fast and secure pervasive connectivity, high-capacity networks,
          IT expertise and digital equipment and infrastructure are preconditions for the broad
          deployment of AI in the Union;

     E.   whereas it is essential to ensure that people in the Union acquire the necessary skills to
          prepare themselves for the increasing presence of AI in all aspects of human activity;

     F.   whereas AI can be used to improve learning and teaching methods, notably by helping
          education systems to use data to improve educational equity and quality, whilst
          promoting personalisation and better access to education;

     G.   whereas culture plays a central role in the use of AI at scale and is emerging as a key
          discipline for cultural heritage thanks to the development of innovative technologies and
          tools and their effective application to respond to the needs of the sector;

     H.   whereas AI can be used to create innovative ways to make datasets of cultural artefacts
          held by cultural institutions across the Union widely accessible whilst allowing users to
          navigate the vast amount of cultural and creative content;

     I.   whereas the use of AI for media content, notably personalised content
          recommendations, raises issues regarding cultural and linguistic diversity;

     J.   whereas AI could have a substantial impact on special needs education, as well as on
          the accessibility of cultural and creative content for people with disabilities;

     K.   whereas AI-generated fake content, such as ‘deepfakes’, is growing exponentially and
          constitutes an imminent threat to democracy;

     1.   Reiterates the importance of developing quality and inclusive data systems for use in
          deep learning as the use of low-quality, outdated, incomplete or incorrect data may lead
          to poor predictions and in turn discrimination and bias; highlights that it is essential to
          develop capabilities at both national and Union level to improve data collection and
          systematisation;

     2.   Stresses the need to address the ethical and legal issues raised by the use of AI such as
          the transparency and accountability of algorithms and the ownership, collection, use and
          dissemination of data;

          Education


     PE655.862v01-00                              4/10                           PR\1211077EN.docx


EN
3.    Recalls the importance of strengthening digital skills at Union level as a prerequisite for
      the use of AI in education; calls on the Commission, in that regard, to make AI-related
      skills one of the main priorities of its next Digital Education Action Plan;

4.    Stresses that the learning benefits of using AI in education will depend not on AI itself,
      but on how teachers use AI to meet the needs of both students and teachers; points out,
      therefore, the need for AI programmers to involve teachers in designing AI-sustainable
      solutions that are suitable for real-life educational environments;

5.    Highlights, moreover, the need to train teachers so they can adapt to the realities of AI-
      powered education and acquire the necessary skills to use AI in a pedagogical and
      meaningful way;

6.    Underlines the importance of training highly skilled professionals in the field of AI and
      of upskilling the future workforce to enable it to cope with the realities of an AI-driven
      labour market; thus encourages the Member States to upgrade their educational offers
      with AI-related skills and to put in place specific curricula for AI developers;

      Cultural heritage

7.    Stresses that AI can play a significant role in preserving, promoting and managing
      cultural heritage, notably by monitoring and analysing changes to cultural heritage sites
      caused by threats such as climate change, natural disasters and armed conflicts;

8.    Stresses that AI provides new opportunities for cultural institutions, such as museums,
      to produce innovative tools for documenting and accessing cultural heritage sites,
      notably through 3D modelling and augmented virtual reality;

9.    Stresses that good practices in AI for cultural heritage accessibility should be identified
      and shared amongst cultural networks across the Union;

10.   Stresses that AI can also be used to monitor the illicit trafficking of cultural objects and
      the destruction of cultural property, whilst supporting data collection for recovery and
      reconstruction efforts;

      Cultural and creative sectors (CCS)

11.   Deplores the fact that culture is not amongst the priorities outlined in policy options and
      recommendations on AI at Union level, notably in the Commission’s white paper of 19
      February 2020 on AI;

12.   Stresses the need to set up a coherent vision of AI in the CCS at Union level; calls on
      the Member States to strengthen the focus on culture in their AI national strategies to
      ensure that cultural diversity is safeguarded and promoted at Union level in the new
      digital context;

13.   Calls on the Commission and the Member States to support critical public discourse on
      AI and to raise awareness of the benefits of its use in the CCS;

      Audiovisual sector

14.   Stresses that algorithms used by media service providers and video sharing platforms

PR\1211077EN.docx                              5/10                              PE655.862v01-00


                                                                                                     EN
           should be designed in such a way that they do not privilege specific works by limiting
           their ‘personalised’ suggestions to the most popular works, for targeted advertising,
           commercial purposes or to maximise profit;

     15.   Stresses, moreover, that the use of AI in algorithm-based content recommendations on
           online audiovisual media services, such video on demand services, may have a serious
           impact on cultural diversity, notably regarding the obligation to ensure the prominence
           of European works under Article 13 of the Audiovisual Media Services Directive
           (Directive (EU) 2018/1808);

     16.   Suggests establishing a clear ethical framework for the use of AI in media to ensure
           access to culturally and linguistically diverse content at Union level, based on
           accountable, transparent and inclusive algorithms; stresses, in that regard, that the
           framework should also address the misuse of AI to disseminate fake news and online
           misinformation;

           Online disinformation: deepfakes

     17.   Recalls that with new techniques rapidly emerging, detecting deepfakes is becoming
           increasingly challenging because malicious deepfake makers can generate algorithms
           that can be trained to evade detection;

     18.   Welcomes recent initiatives and projects to create more efficient deepfake-detecting
           tools and transparency requirements; stresses, in that regard, the need to explore and
           invest in methods for tackling deepfakes as a crucial step in combatting misinformation;

                                                      °

                                                 °          °

     19.   Instructs its President to forward this resolution to the Council and the Commission.




     PE655.862v01-00                                 6/10                       PR\1211077EN.docx


EN
                                EXPLANATORY STATEMENT


“I believe that at the end of the century the use of words and general educated opinion will
have altered so much that one will be able to speak of machines thinking without expecting to
be contradicted”

Alan Turing, 1947


The last decade has been transformative for AI, arousing both fear and excitement for
humanity. Seen as ‘the new electricity’, AI has advanced to the point that it will have such
a systemic impact that it could substantially change all aspects of society for the next century.
Whilst it is easy to understand the potential effects of AI on sectors such telecommunications,
transportation, traffic management, health care, evaluating its long-term effects on education,
culture and the audiovisual sector is considerably more challenging. Although there is a
consensus that AI and automation is likely to create more wealth and to simplify a vast array
of processes, the use of AI has also raised serious concerns that it may result in an increase in
inequality, discrimination and unemployment.

The potential impact of AI on education, culture and the audiovisual sector is however rarely
discussed and is mostly unknown. Yet this question is of utmost importance because AI is
already being used to teach curricula, as well as to produce movies, songs, stories and
paintings.

The purpose of this report is therefore to understand concretely how AI currently impacts
these sectors and how future technological advances in AI will impact them further over the
next decade. In particular, the Rapporteur reflects on how AI may transform these sectors and
which particular regulatory challenges the Union may have to face in that regard.


(i) AI is reshaping education

AI is transforming learning, teaching, and education radically. The whirlwind speed of
technological development accelerates the radical transformation of educational practices,
institutions and policies. In this field, AI has many applications, such as customisable
approaches to learning, AI-based tutors, textbooks and course material with customised
content, smart algorithms to determine best teaching methods, AI game engines, and adaptive
user models in personalised learning environments (PLE) which can allow early identification
of difficulties, such as dyslexia or risks of early school leaving.

Personalised learning experience is the cornerstone of the use of AI in education. It would
allow students to enjoy an educational approach that is fully tailored to their individual
abilities, needs and difficulties, whilst enabling teachers to closely monitor students’ progress.
However in order to make personalised education a reality, large amounts of personal data
need to be collected, used and analysed.

The Rapporteur stresses in that regard that the current lack of access to personal data on
students is likely to prevent the successful implementation of AI in education. It is thus
essential to ensure the safety and transparency of personal data collection, use, management

PR\1211077EN.docx                              7/10                              PE655.862v01-00


                                                                                                     EN
     and dissemination, whilst safeguarding confidentiality and privacy of learners’ personal data.
     Moreover, addressing the risks of AI potential bias, as well as tackling the issue of data
     storage should be a priority in any initiatives for the wide deployment of AI in the education
     system at Union level.

     Although there is little chance that teachers will be replaced by machines in the near future,
     the increasing use of AI in education implies the need to rethink education overall, as well as
     to reflect on the redefinition of teaching, the role of the teachers, and, as a result, the
     subsequent retraining required to adapt to a AI-based educational system.
     Considering that less than 40% of teachers in the Union have received courses on ICT
     inclusion in the classroom throughout their Initial Teacher Education (ITE), the Rapporteur
     would like to stress the crucial importance of training teachers so they acquire digital skills
     as a prerequisite to becoming familiar with AI. They could then take advantage of AI
     technologies, but also make them aware of the potential dangers of AI.

     This issue can also be seen more widely, with 42% of the Union population still lacking basic
     digital skills. There are also serious regional discrepancies in access to digital infrastructure
     and in digital skills attainment across the Union.

     Emerging technology trends related to digital transformation, such as AI, have profound
     implications in terms of the skills required for the evolving digital economy. In particular, the
     notion of lifelong learning in AI has emerged as one of the key strategies for job security and
     employment in the digital era.

     The Rapporteur suggests that citizens are trained to acquire the necessary digital skills, whilst
     carefully assessing what AI-related skills are needed today and in the future, and that the
     necessary measures are taken to address existing and emerging skill gaps.

     It also crucial to ensure that the prerequisites for the deployment and the relevant use of AI, in
     terms of internet access, connectivity, networks and infrastructures, are met.


     (ii) AI can be used to safeguard and promote cultural heritage

     In recent years, AI has been of increasing relevance to cultural heritage, notably in response to
     potential modern threats, such as climate change or conflicts. AI can have various
     applications in that regard: it can be used to enhance users’ experience by enabling visitors of
     cultural institutions and museums to create personal narrative trails or to enjoy virtual tour
     guides. Conversational bots could communicate in an interactive way about cultural heritage
     on any topics and in any language. They would also make the access to information easier
     whilst providing a vivid cultural experience to users.

     AI could also facilitate the understanding of the history of the Union, such as how the ‘Time
     Machine Project’ aims to create advanced AI technologies to make sense of vast amounts of
     information from complex historical data sets stored in archives and museums. This enables
     the transformation of fragmented data into useable knowledge by mapping Union’s entire
     social, cultural and geographical evolution. This may facilitate the exploration of the cultural,
     economic, and historical development of European cities, and improve understanding thereof.



     PE655.862v01-00                                8/10                           PR\1211077EN.docx


EN
(iii) AI changes the way the cultural and creative industries work, in particular the
audiovisual sector

AI use is rapidly expanding in media with many applications:

   -   Data-driven marketing and advertising, by training machine learning algorithms to
       develop promotional movie trailers and design advertisements,

   -   Personalisation of users’ experience, by using machine learning to recommend
       personalised content based on data from user activity and behaviour,

   -   Search optimisation, by using AI to improve the speed and efficiency of the media
       production process and the ability to organise visual assets,

   -   Content creation, by generating video clips from automatic video segments ready for
       broadcast and special effects, such as re-creating a younger version of an actor digitally
       or creating new content with a deceased actor,

   -   Script writing such as simple factual text creation (sports and news reports produced by
       robots), but also for writing fictional stories, such as the experimental short movie
       ‘Sunspring’,

   -   Viewer interaction on complex story lines, such as the last episode of the British series
       ‘Black Mirror’, ‘Bandersnatch’,

   -   Automated captioning and subtitling, such audio-to-text processes, for viewers with
       disabilities

   -   Automated content moderation on audiovisual content.


Whilst AI offers a wide range of opportunities in producing high quality cultural and creative
content, the centralised distribution and access to such content raises a number of ethical and
legal issues, notably on data protection, freedom of expression and cultural diversity.

Cultural and creative works, notably audiovisual works, are mainly distributed through
large centralised platforms, which conditions media consumption to the proprietary
algorithms developed by these platforms.

The Rapporteur points out that algorithm-based personalised recommendations are potentially
detrimental to cultural and linguistic diversity, preventing under-represented cultural and
creative content from appearing in suggestions provided by these systems. On the largest
platforms, the criteria used to select or recommend a work are neither transparent nor
auditable, and are likely to be decided on the basis of economic factors that solely benefit
these platforms.

The question of cultural and linguistic diversity in recommendation systems is therefore
crucial and must be addressed. The Rapporteur stresses the need to set up a clear legal
framework for transparent, accountable and inclusive algorithms, in order to safeguard
and promote cultural and linguistic diversity.


PR\1211077EN.docx                             9/10                             PE655.862v01-00


                                                                                                    EN
     Regulatory challenges triggered by AI applications within the audiovisual sector are also
     linked to existing legal acts, such as the AVMSD. Thus a more in-depth assessment might be
     needed as to the urgency and/or political momentum for future adaptions of these files to AI.

     Whilst AI can help empower many creators, making CCS more prosperous and driving
     cultural diversity, the large majority of artists and entrepreneurs may not still be familiar with
     AI tools.

     There is a lack of technical knowledge among creators precluding them from experimenting
     with machine learning and reaping the benefits they can bring. Therefore it is essential to
     assess which skills would be needed in the near future, whilst at the same time improving
     training systems, including upskilling and reskilling, guaranteeing lifelong learning
     throughout the whole working life and beyond.

     In that context, the Rapporteur suggests setting up an AI observatory with an objective of
     harmonising and facilitating evidence-based scrutiny of new developments in AI in
     order to tackle the question of auditability and accountability of AI applications in CCS.


     (v) Countering fake news

     AI-technologies are increasingly used to disseminate fake news, notably through the use of
     ‘deepfakes’.
     Deepfakes are synthetic images or videos generated by AI using ‘deep learning machines’ and
     generative adversial networks (GAN). Humans cannot distinguish deepfakes from authentic
     content. Deepfakes can be used for all kinds of trickery, most commonly used for ‘face
     swaps’, from harmless satires and film tweaks to malicious hoaxes, targeted harassment,
     deepfake porn or financial fraud, The danger of deepfakes is to make people believe
     something is real when it is not, and thus may be used as a particularly powerful and potent
     weapon for online disinformation, spreading virally on platforms and social media, where
     they can influence public opinion, voting processes and election results.

     Whilst AI is frequently singled out for its role in spreading fake news, it could also play a
     significant role in countering and combating fake news and disinformation, as evidenced by
     projects such as “Fake News Challenge”. AI systems can reverse-engineer AI generated fake
     news, and help spot manipulated content. However algorithms generating deepfakes are
     getting more and more sophisticated, and detecting them as a result is getting increasingly
     difficult.

     The Rapporteur therefore stresses the need to tackle the misuse of AI in disseminating fake
     news and online misinformation, notably by exploring ways to efficiently detect
     deepfakes.




     PE655.862v01-00                               10/10                           PR\1211077EN.docx


EN
