                                  Session

Data and technologies for architectural and urban
                history (UHDL)
Chairpersons:
Sander Muenster (U JENA) - Germany

Descrip.on and Mo.va.on:
Urban and architectural history are key areas in digital humani?es and digital
heritage. With respect to these research areas, digital repositories, data and
research methods play an important role, especially when hos?ng visual media
like photographs, pain?ngs, or drawings, and last but not least physical and
virtual models. Due to the wide ﬁeld of possible research, diﬀerent approaches,
methods and technologies have emerged – and are s?ll emerging.
This session is part of the 4th issue of the Urban History in the Age of Digital
Libraries (UHDL) workshop. UHDLs purpose is to provide a full picture with
regards to epistemics, technology and framework condi?ons. We aim to discuss
crucial challenges for further research and encourage exchange and debate
about humani?es research and educa?on, technologies and data and par?cular
trends as BIM or FAIR and 3D Publica?on/Sharing.
For the proposed session we would like to invite contribu?ons on theore?cal
and methodological issues, applica?on scenarios and projects, as well as novel
approaches and tools in the following areas:



•     Data handling and data schemes
•     Machine Learning and Ar?ﬁcial Intelligence
•     Visualiza?on and Presenta?on
1. Data handling and data schemes
The immense eﬀort invested in digi?za?on and rapid changes in technologies
and formats has greatly increased the importance of data standards. Long-term
data storage, availability of models and the interoperability of data formats are
major challenges to exis?ng digital infrastructures. We welcome contribu?ons
on:
•     3D databases as a tool to support urban historical research
•     Metadata and paradata
•     Linked and seman?c data related to urban historical research
•     the inﬂuence of knowledge of HCI on the design of historic models

2. Machine Learning and Ar?ﬁcial Intelligence
During the past few years, various new technological opportuni?es have arisen
from big data, Seman?c Web technologies, and the exponen?al growth in data
accessible via digital libraries such as EUROPEANA. Data-driven supervised and
unsupervised classiﬁca?on approaches have been used to acquire high-level
seman?c concepts, especially from the interconnec?on of diﬀerent types of
data. Interdisciplinary collabora?ons between computer science and
humani?es disciplines are essen?al in developing methods and workﬂows to
enable cultural heritage research to exploit machine learning approaches. We
welcome contribu?ons on:
•      use cases and best prac?ces of applied machine learning in digital
humani?es research
•      approaches and technologies, e.g. radiance ﬁelds, image-based synthesis

3. Visualiza?on and Presenta?on
Historians in cultural heritage research today are enabled to explore new
research direc?ons due to the availability of mul?tudes of digi?zed historical
photographs in image repositories. Moreover, novel approaches such as the
photogrammetric reconstruc?on of historical buildings from image databases
allow for contextualiza?on and intui?ve access to data. Typical mo?va?ons for
accessing these archives and repositories are scien?ﬁc research, pedagogical
applica?ons, and the study of historical sites. These areas require advances in
methods for visualiza?on and presenta?on of data to support the diﬀerent
target groups. We welcome contribu?ons on:
•      Projects and inves?ga?ons from urban history concerned with
visualiza?ons and presenta?on of spa?al and/or scholarly data
•      Research scenarios for scholars using visualiza?ons of urban history data
•      Interdisciplinarity, e.g. intersec?ons between digital cultural heritage and
(sustainable) tourism studies
•      Data handling and data schemes
•      Machine Learning and Ar?ﬁcial Intelligence
•      Visualiza?on and Presenta?on

Target Audience:
The target group for this session includes professionals, researchers, and
prac??oners from cultural heritage ins?tu?on, digital technology, policies, and
research, with a focus on those interested in the intersec?on of technology and
heritage. Speciﬁc groups include:
•      Cultural Heritage Professionals: Conservators, restorers, heritage site
managers, and curators using digital tools for preserva?on and documenta?on.
•      Digital Technology Experts: BIM specialists, architects, engineers, and 3D
modeling professionals working on heritage conserva?on projects.
•      Academics and Researchers: Scholars and researchers studying heritage
preserva?on, digital methodologies, and climate adapta?on strategies.
•      Policymakers and Legal Experts: Professionals addressing the ethical and
legal dimensions of digi?zing cultural heritage and crea?ng relevant policies.

Keywords:
UHDL, urban history, technology, AI


Click here to make a submission!
