         Making the Europeana Data Model a Better Fit
              for Documentation of 3D Objects

     Antoine Isaac1(B) , Kate Fernie2 , Valentina Bachi3 , Eleftheria Tsoupra1 ,
     Marco Medici4 , Henk Alkemade2 , Sander Münster5 , Valentine Charles1 ,
                              and Lianne Heslinga2
                  1 Europeana Foundation, 2595 BE The Hague, The Netherlands
                             antoine.isaac@europeana.eu
                                  2 CARARE, Dublin, Ireland
                 3 Photoconsortium, via della Bonifica 69, 56037 Peccioli, Italy
                    4 INCEPTION s.r.l., Via Ghiara 36, 44121 Ferrara, Italy
        5 Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Am Fürstengraben 1, 07743 Jena, Germany




         Abstract. The current effort in 3D digitisation of heritage items poses new chal-
         lenges in accommodating more and higher quality information to be associated
         with the 3D models that are of interest to users and stakeholders. The Euro-
         peana Data Model (EDM) is a metadata schema that distinguishes between the
         information related to the cultural heritage object as such (represented by the
         class edm:ProvidedCHO) and the information related to its digital representation
         (edm:WebResource), brought together in the class ore:Aggregation. Work done
         in the context of the new common European data space for cultural heritage col-
         lected inputs from various experts and initiatives working on 3D data, metadata
         and paradata, in the light of studying requirements for the extension and adapta-
         tion of EDM classes to the more complex scenario of representing and sharing 3D
         digitised cultural heritage collections.

         Keywords: 3D digitisation · 3D models · metadata schema · paradata · cultural
         heritage collections



1 Introduction

This paper presents an analysis of the Europeana Data Model (EDM) from the perspective
of enhancing representation of 3D in Europeana, both in terms of accommodating a larger
quantity of items and representations, and higher quality of information, considering the
growing recognition of the importance of paradata in 3D documentation in the light of
supporting reuse. it is the product of a working group gathering representatives from the
Europeana Initiative, most of whom are also involved in data space projects1 currently
ongoing on 3D (5D Culture [2] and EUreka3D [3]).

 1 The common European data space for cultural heritage [1] is an initiative of the European
   Union.

© The Author(s) 2025
M. Ioannides et al. (Eds.): 3D Research Challenges in Cultural Heritage V, LNCS 15190, pp. 63–74, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-78590-0_6
64          A. Isaac et al.

    In the process, we have looked at relevant related work - some of which involving
the members of the group producing this report: EC 3D studies [4], deliverables of
the 4CH initiative [5], other past Europeana outcomes and work, like the report of the
EuropeanaTech task force on 3D content in Europeana [6], and concrete examples of
metadata coming from projects like Share3D [7] and WEAVE [8].


2 Basic Modelling Principles for 3D in EDM

2.1 Modelling Distinctions that Matter: Cultural Objects, Digital Representations
    and the One-to-One Principle
As shown in Fig. 1, the basis of EDM’s modelling approach is the distinction between
a Cultural Heritage Object (represented by the class edm:ProvidedCHO2 ), digital
representations of that object (edm:WebResource) and the “package” that brings
them together (ore:aggregation). The one-to-one principle [10] is then applied
with the aim that each resource “carries” information that belongs to it and not to another
resource. This means, for example, that the date of when a “real-world” object was
digitised, which resulted in the creation of some media (an image, an audio file…), is
attached to the WebResource that stands for the resulting media file, while the date
of creation of the original object is attached to the ProvidedCHO, even though both
are expressed using a same metadata element (dcterms:created).




Fig. 1. Basic EDM pattern representing an aggregation of a cultural object together with digital
representations.


    There are some known issues with the application of the one-to-one principle in
EDM. Especially, there is a long-standing issue in that the ProvidedCHO carries the
edm:type attribute that belongs on the WebResource (cf. Sect. 3).
    We argue that better applying the one-to-one principle can be the basis for handling
the case of 3D representations of cultural objects in EDM. Our approach has taken into
account relevant work such as (1) 4CH’s analysis of 3D data generation and creation
for Cultural Heritage (cf. [11], Sec. 2) and (2) previous experiments in preparing for
2 EDM is based on the RDF(S) model [9], where resources are represented as instances of classes
     and attributes and relationships of resources are represented using properties.
    Making the Europeana Data Model a Better Fit for Documentation of 3D Objects              65

Europeana objects that have been represented by 3D models, notably in the Share3D
project. Let us exemplify it with the example of a Japanese Arita Ware porcelain figure
from the Hunt Museum, whose 3D model has been published on Sketchfab [12]. This
case corresponds to a “reality-captured” 3D model in the 4CH report, as “the source data
are directly coming from the original asset”. We propose to represent the “real world”
porcelain figure as an instance of edm:ProvidedCHO, whose metadata can include a
title like “Japanese Arita Ware porcelain figure of a puppy” and “17th century” as date of
creation. The 3D model itself can be represented as an instance of edm:WebResource
carrying metadata statements like “Models processed using Meshlab and Blender” under
description with “2022” as date of creation. The different metadata statements for the
date of creation, especially, exemplify the application of the one-to-one principle, as
they use the same property dcterms:created but with different values when they
are used for different resources (Fig. 2).




          Fig. 2. Distribution of some metadata values onto the main EDM classes.


    A main motivation for following the one-to-one approach strictly is its consistency
and wide applicability: the same pattern can be employed for various types of 3D model,
and is compatible with the approach undertaken in EDM for non-3D representations. As
a matter of fact it also allows for “mixed” situations where an object is provided with 3D
representations and non-3D ones3 . It seamlessly enables the representation of objects
that are provided with different 3D models, or versions of a 3D model (for example with
different numbers of polygons or points, and different rights).
    Note that the distribution of (meta)data onto the various resources brought together in
the EDM Aggregation, and with descriptions of digital representations separate from
the description of the heritage asset, is very much in line with ontological approaches to
digital twins4 in Cultural Heritage. See for example [14], which defines a digital twin
as “the digital representation of the complex of knowledge about [an] heritage asset”
and proposes to model it as a resource that points both to the asset and includes various
documents, e.g., 3D models and other visual imagery.


3 For example when a building is provided both with a 3D model and “traditional” 2D
  photographs.
4 A Digital Twin can be generally defined as “a virtual replica of a physical product, process or
  system” [13].
66          A. Isaac et al.

2.2 From Reality-Captured 3D Models to Born-Digital Objects
The pattern can extend to the process of creating a 3D reconstruction of a heritage asset
at a moment in time in the past. In the case of 3D, as the 4CH report elaborates, some
3D models include elements that are not directly extracted from reality but instead come
from interpretations of cultural objects, for example based on historical documentation
(see Appendix “Sample metadata for 3D reconstruction” in our technical report [15]).
In this case we speak of 3D reconstructions or “born-digital-reconstructions”.
     These models have a more complex workflow in comparison to reality-captured
models. For example, the workflow may include data capture on the surviving fragments
of a CHO, followed by data processing and modelling to reconstruct aspects of a building
based on information from plans or drawings which show how it may have looked like
in the past. A reconstruction is a representation of the object at a moment in time in the
past.
     Take for example a digital reconstruction of Wojsławice town in the 1930s [16]. A
first EDM interpretation of this case would be to claim that the historical town itself is
the CHO, and the 3D model is a digital web resource that is directly associated with
it (i.e., linking an instance of an ore:Aggregation to the 3D model via one of the
properties edm:isShownBy, edm:isShownAt or edm:hasView). However, the
nature of the reconstruction (i.e. not purely based on captured reality) would argue for
not only focusing on the “original” real-world object as the CHO. The reconstruction
of the original object – as an “information object” created following research and inter-
pretation – could also be treated as CHO. There would be CHOs for both the town
and the reconstruction related via the edm:isRepresentationOf property, or the
more general property dc:subject. The edm:ProvidedCHO resource would carry
metadata that applies to the representation (information object), i.e. the creator would
be the creator of the model, not the founder of the town. Note that this still does not
mean that the ProvidedCHO resource should have metadata that belongs to the level
of a specific WebResource. In fact the reconstruction may not be entirely born digital:
there might be analog or digital archives that were employed during the process of cre-
ating the (3D) representation, which are also contributed as web resources. In this case,
the “reconstruction CHO” should not have metadata statements that hint that it is only
a 3D representation. For that to happen, a provider would have to distinguish between
distinct CHOs for the 3D representation and the analog sketches (Fig. 3).
     The same approach applies similarly to other important cases where the object itself
is born digital, as for an abstraction of a design or the work of an artist’s imagination that
does not represent any pre-existing real world object (this may also include AI-generated
objects). This can happen, among others, for architectural (and other) design drawings.
For example, in the case of a competition to design a major public building5 , only one of
the designs is built. The other designs are proposals which do not represent a real-world
object but which may be preserved as part of an architect’s archive - ideas that may be
reused and re-interpreted in future buildings. In the past the designs would have been
done on paper, as with the analogue room design at [18]. Today more and more are
born-digital.
5 E.g., the Re-imagining Cappadocia as an Eco-District Architecture competition mentions 3D
     visualisations among the media that can be submitted [17].
    Making the Europeana Data Model a Better Fit for Documentation of 3D Objects              67




Fig. 3. Variants for reconstructions of an object: (top left) with a cultural object representing
the town, (top right) treating the 3D reconstruction as a cultural object; (bottom) With both 3D
reconstruction and 2D sketches as cultural objects.


    In this case of a born-digital object the CHO is also described at a conceptual
level and the digital representation is the “materialisation” of it, e.g., as a file. One
object/concept/intention may have different representations and different media files -
for example providing different views, offering different types of 3D modelling, different
quality, different rights.


3 Identifying and Addressing Basic Limitations for 3D in EDM
When we started discussing the approach above, we knew that there are discrepancies
between the current EDM - and especially, the way it is often applied - and the theoretical
approach. To further identify limitations, we have applied the above principles to an
example from the Share3D project (see appendix in our technical report [15]). The
metadata shown there tries to respect the one-to-one principle and the distinction between
the original object and the 3D representation. It also represents some data that we believe
is important, either present in the original example or mentioned in the literature.
    First, we observed that some important information like description or file format
are already supported in EDM.
    Other requirements would be met by relatively straightforward additions to the
current EDM WebResource class:
• allowing the representation of types of model by high-level categorisation between
  “reality captured” models and “3D reconstruction”
• allowing the representation of types of model by technical aspect of the representation
  (cf. slide 13 of [19]): point cloud, mesh with higher or lower polygon count, with or
  without textures, BIM and parametric models, etc. (from a controlled list of types,
  preferably)
• (maybe) enabling dc:title and dcterms:provenance
68          A. Isaac et al.

    For the first two requirements, the example in the appendix at [15] uses dc:type.
However, we have made this choice merely to illustrate the matter at hand. Both could
be addressed by using a different property, either reused from an existing namespace or
newly created in the EDM vocabulary (similarly to edm:type). This will have to be
discussed in the next steps of our work. In any case, both requirements probably require
establishing a controlled vocabulary of possible values. Such endeavour relates to a more
general effort to inspect whether existing EDM properties need to be provided with
recommendations on using controlled vocabularies that are specific to the 3D context -
for example on foreseen file formats.
    We then identified a fundamental issue with the usage of the existing property
edm:type, which is meant to reflect the general media category of an object, like
TEXT or IMAGE, for Europeana purposes. This type should not be attached to Pro-
videdCHO as it is currently. For example, in the case of a statue that has some digital
images, edm:type is set to IMAGE. But if the same statue in a different context would
have been provided with a 3D model, edm:type should be set to 3D. It would be
more appropriate to attach the type of media to the resource that stands for the media
representation of the cultural object, i.e., the edm:WebResource.
    As an alternative (or in addition), the property could be attached to the
ore:Aggregation6 . But we should then probably allow for multiple edm:type
statements on the ore:Aggregation class, to cater for the cases where an object
has representations of different types (say, a 3D model and some more classical pho-
tographs that dictate using IMAGE as value for edm:type). However, even though this
option meets simple user information needs like “retrieve objects that have at least one
3D representation”, it would complicate rather than improve the model. If edm:type
is moved to the level of edm:WebResource, the type of each representation for an
object is clear. If it is moved to the ore:Aggregation and we allow multiple types,
the type of each representation is not clear.


4 Advanced 3D Requirements for EDM
The previous section seeks to address common, basic needs of characterization of 3D
objects. We identified more advanced requirements that can play a crucial role, too.
    The first category regards the intended usage of representations available on the web
for 3D objects. When sharing 3D models in a context like that of the data space, it makes
a big difference whether a representation is meant for a specific (technical) purpose,
(such as preservation) or for viewing. This distinction could be made explicit in EDM.
A specific case is that of content accessed via a viewer, for example Sketchfab’s, which
can be embedded in another page, for example on europeana.eu. Another example is
when a provider would like to give a link to the raw/full version of a 3D model instead of
relying on re-users asking for it via another process. From a user perspective it would be
useful to have access to information about how such - often very large - resources may
6 This case would be similar to what happens for the edm:rights property, which is used
     to express controlled rights statements. An edm:rights statement must be attached to the
     Aggregation in order to apply as a “default” to the WebResources attached to it, in case
     these do not have their own edm:rights statement.
    Making the Europeana Data Model a Better Fit for Documentation of 3D Objects                69

be consumed (e.g., the software, media bundles, contexts etc.). We do not know yet from
the perspective of the data space, how best to support this access. These requirements
are not specific to 3D but they can play a significant role in the 3D context.
     The second category of desirable extension of EDM regards context and especially
the paradata; “auxiliary information [..] that describe the data acquisition process” [4].
For us, paradata is a kind of metadata that can be crucial to some types of data space users,
especially those who rely on rich and trusted provenance information on the 3D content
for professional research or re-use. While the collection and management of paradata
is highly valued by the scientific community, in cultural heritage it often represents an
innovation in the institutions’ workflows, which brings added value in terms of enabling
the digital transformation of the sector.
     We do not foresee that EDM will be extended to cope with all the possible paradata
collected at source, which can be very rich and specific. Yet, we recognise that a subset
of this information can be very useful in the data space for access and re-use scenarios,
especially to inform about the authenticity of the model, relevant technical aspects of the
model’s creation process and re-use conditions. For example information on motivation
(e.g., “research”) and limitations of digitisation projects give hints about the quality and
trustworthiness of the 3D model. Examples of such provenance aspects could include
the indication that a model results from a general “research” (project) motivation, that
it is generated from AI training datasets and has not been curated, or that it was created
photogrammetrically from user-generated images.
     A survey of existing metadata schemas for 3D objects has led us to identify the general
categories of paradata that are most relevant for the data space: identification of creation
process, methodology followed, people involved, temporal and spatial information, and
identification of the various digital resources produced as well as their lineage. Based on
this survey, a “core” set of elements from these paradata categories will be considered for
inclusion in an EDM extension for 3D for easier consumption. EDM already provides
a generic mechanism that allows the creators of 3D content to provide a relation to the
full paradata (e.g. in a document expressing the information in the relevant standards or
more specific formats) where it can be accessed by data re-users.
     Note that some “simple” provenance requirements such as capturing the roles of the
people or organisations involved in the life cycle of 3D models7 may need significant
extensions of EDM. The issue of representing roles of agents, for instance, has been
identified for a long time as a general limitation of EDM, and it requires non-lightweight
solutions such as introducing events [20].


5 Supporting Work Needed

This section gathers issues that are not about data modelling proper, but, which should
be addressed so that providers are encouraged to follow best practices.


7 This is especially important to give indication on the authenticity and trustworthiness of the
  model, e.g., whether it is created by a research team based on data with high geometric accuracy,
  or by a project with other motivations and more limited resources.
70          A. Isaac et al.

Review of Documentation and Guidelines. Our experience tells that more guidance
on specific (mapping) points will be useful. Many issues relate to the one-to-one princi-
ple. EDM provides the ability to distinguish the cultural asset (ProvidedCHO) from its
specific digital representations. Statements that apply to the asset or the digital represen-
tations should be attributed to the specific EDM resources that stand for it. It is crucial
to decide whether the ProvidedCHO is the original object or a digital representation8 .
Metadata statements such as the creation date should follow that choice. Note that we do
not claim that statements of one kind are more important than others. Of course, users
will often benefit much from knowing the date of creation of the original CH asset. But
some users will also need to know when the 3D model of that asset was created.
     Consider an item that represents a real-world object/monument, as hinted by the use
of “church” in the ProvidedCHO’s dc:title (without any mention of a “3D model”
in it) and a date like “13th century” as the date of creation. Here are some examples of
possible other statements for the ProvidedCHO that would raise a discrepancy issue:

• a dc:subject with “3D model”: in this example the church is the subject of
  the ProvidedCHO, the format of the digital representation is best entered into the
  WebResource.
• a dcterms:extent describing the number of polygons in the 3D model: technical
  data about the model is best entered into the WebResource. A church’s extent would
  rather consist of its physical dimensions.
• a dc:rights that mention the creator of the 3D model in some project, not the
  creators of the church. Here it is best to include rights information about the 3D
  model in the WebResource.

    These metadata statements should be present on an instance of the WebResource
class, not the ProvidedCHO, when that ProvidedCHO is meant to stand for an
(analog) heritage asset9 . These are not specific to the case of 3D, but for 3D their impact
can be significant - especially as they could happen very often.
    It is worth noting that the existing EDM guidelines can be confusing. Echoing the
issue of edm:type mentioned in the previous section, the EDM mapping guidelines
for dc:format on the edm:ProvidedCHO include the instruction “Use the value
3D-PDF if appropriate”. This is actually not compatible with following the one-to-one
principle and should be removed.
    Separating these elements of information would require creating a new instance of
the EDM WebResource class when it is not present in the provided metadata. This
is an extra effort, but it is very much in line with the needs to represent valuable, 3D-
specific information (type of model, digital provenance) introduced in the earlier parts
of this report. Guidelines should emphasise this.


8 This concern also holds in the case of objects with non-3D representations, where attributes of
     the digital representation should not be mixed with those of the original cultural object.
9 The situation of a ProvidedCHO standing for a born-digital object would be different. There,
     for example, the dc:creator of the ProvidedCHO is likely to be also the creator of the model
     itself (which should still be also represented on the WebResource).
    Making the Europeana Data Model a Better Fit for Documentation of 3D Objects        71

Recommendations for the Delivery of 3D. Specific care is needed to articulate rec-
ommendations on the web resources themselves, which are provided for an object. For
example, it is sometimes not possible to give access to a “raw” 3D model, due to the
size of these files. In any case, it is important to provide alternatives to the raw model,
such as with an edm:isShownBy linking to an embeddable viewer which is supported
by Europeana, and/or an edm:isShownAt pointing to a view of the objects at the
data provider’s website. In case the provider wants to point to the raw model (e.g., for
specific types of professional users, such as architects or conservators), this is possible
by including a relation in the metadata, for example to an archive published on Zenodo
or to the provider’s own website.
Exploitation of Enhanced Metadata on 3D Representations. Several of the issues
that we have observed for representing 3D objects can be traced back to concerns of
display in the Europeana website. For example a record can have the dc:format
and dc:type duplicated across a WebResource and the ProvidedCHO. This is
certainly not because these attributes cannot be used with WebResources. It is rather
because they are not displayed on the europeana.eu portal when they are used only on
the WebResource. Even the dc:creator field is not displayed when it is attached
to the WebResource. This is a barrier for data providers that seek to convey to users
information that they feel is important. Adapting display and search (indexing) to better
surface information about (3D) web resources should be implemented at the same time
as the data model is deployed and documentation is updated.


6 Roadmap for Future Work
As next steps, we will work on confirming the proposals and progress on their
implementation. The main elements of work are:
Identify Requirements for Paradata and Technical Metadata on 3D Models
in the Data Space. These requirements will include the representation of:

• types of model by high-level categorisation (“reality captured” vs. “3D reconstruc-
  tion”)
• types of model by technical aspect of the representation (cf. Slide 13 of [19]): point
  cloud, mesh with higher or lower polygon count, with or without textures, etc. (from
  a controlled list of types, preferably)
• types of model by project/motivation/limitations (esp., provenance info that could
  give hints about the quality and trustworthiness of the 3D model)
• intended usage of 3D models, especially, for links to embeddable viewers
• any other context information (digital provenance) is relevant to capture
  for basic access and re-use scenarios in Europeana (including and beyond
  dcterms:provenance). This could focus on elements which are in existing established
  schema for paradata (e.g., CIDOC-CRM dig, CARARE 2.0 etc.) or which can be
  detected automatically.
72         A. Isaac et al.

    We will seek to identify these requirements from studying (re-)user applications10 ,
earlier reports11 , more record examples12 , existing and coming metadata schema inven-
tories and mappings. We will check whether additional requirements would arise from
other efforts in the data space that are not specific to 3D but may have a relation, such
as work on enrichment, provenance and annotations.
    Identify which new elements should be included in the EDM model, trying to
re-use as much as possible existing metadata standards used in the domain. E.g., for con-
text/provenance, re-using Dublin Core’s dcterms:provenance13 (for more EDM
classes), the proposed extension for events in EDM and/or specific modelling support
for software processes, like dcterms:Software. Emphasis should be given on use
of Linked Open Data data models and vocabularies.
    Identify first 3D-centred quality criteria for metadata on 3D objects, especially
identifying mandatory or recommended metadata elements. These could be included
in the Europeana Publishing Framework14 . For instance we can include information
about 3D objects such as file format, number of vertices, etc., in the calculation of EPF
Metadata tiers. The type/motivation for 3D models as discussed in Sec. 4 could also be
relevant with regards to setting up quality requirements on the provenance metadata.
For this effort it will be useful to re-use works that seek to define completeness of 3D
information, such as the 4CH report mentioned above and the VIGIE 2020/654 Study
on quality in 3D digitisation of tangible cultural heritage [1].
    Supporting Work. In line with the directions raised in the previous section, we will
discuss with the designers of the europeana.eu website, how the new metadata and content
could be accessed and displayed. This includes how to download and display different
versions of a 3D model, embeddable viewers ([6] includes a list of viewers in Sec. 5.2
and Appendix 1) as well as provenance information represented via the corresponding
WebResources. We shall also review documentation and guidelines to properly reflect
adherence to the one-to-one principle and avoid problematic mappings mentioned in
Sec. 4. We will also seek feedback from other experts. This would allow more interested
stakeholders to be involved, for example from the EuropeanaTech community.




10 We could use IDOVIR [21] as case study. The portal presents some structured data on 3D
   digitization projects and the software they use, but it seems that it also has a free-form description
   of paradata and a link to a fuller representation.
11 We could draw an inventory of types of 3D content relevant for Europeana and a first analysis of
   digital provenance information from the report of the EuropeanaTech task force on 3D content
   [4] (e.g., Sec. 2.2.1, 5.1, 5.2 and Appendix 1).
12 It will be interesting to present cases where different versions of a 3D model are available and
   hierarchical objects where an object is embedded in another object.
13 Note that the current dcterms:provenance is focused on “ownership and custody” while we
   need to represent paradata.
14 Europeana Publishing Framework. https://pro.europeana.eu/post/publishing-framework.
   Accessed 31 July 2024.
     Making the Europeana Data Model a Better Fit for Documentation of 3D Objects                   73

7 Conclusion

In this paper we report on an analysis of EDM and its support for 3D in Europeana and the
common data space for cultural heritage. Such analysis follows the need of maximising
the impact of heritage digitisation as highlighted in the EC Recommendation 2021/1970
which, among others, poses the focus on 3D to innovate workflows in digitization, reuse
and digital preservation of heritage across the EU. Europeana, as the coordinator of
the data space, leads the digital transformation process that the sector is undergoing by
adapting the existing tools to the new requirements and needs connected to sharing 3D
models and fostering their use and reuse. In this light, we have identified several areas in
which EDM may be adapted or extended in future to offer better support for 3D models,
Digital Twins and paradata. This analysis is a first step that will support further actions:
reflecting on existing metadata and paradata practices, identifying strategies to provide
the datasets published in Europeana with enriched information, and understanding cur-
rent constraints and desired developments. Supporting work is needed to advance our
recommendations both by Europeana Foundation and organisations which are creating
and delivering 3D to the data space. Our roadmap for the future includes specific work
on EDM, on Europeana’s Publishing Framework and website, but also with the content
creators and cultural heritage institutions building capacity to help ensure that high qual-
ity metadata and paradata are produced to support and enable re-use of high quality 3D
content.


References
 1. Common European data space for cultural heritage Homepage. https://www.dataspace-cultur
    alheritage.eu. Accessed 31 July 2024
 2. 5D Culture Homepage. https://5dculture.eu. Accessed 31 July 2024
 3. EUreka3D Homepage. https://eureka3d.eu. Accessed 31 July 2024
 4. Ioannides, M., et al.: Study on quality in 3D digitisation of tangible cultural heritage. Technical
    report, VIGIE 2020/654 (2022). https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/study-quality-
    3d-digitisation-tangible-cultural-heritage. Accessed 31 July 2024
 5. 4CH Homepage. https://www.4ch-project.eu. Accessed 31 July 2024
 6. Fernie, K.: 3D content in Europeana task force. Technical report, Europeana Net-
    work Association (2020). https://pro.europeana.eu/post/3d-content-in-europeana-task-force-
    review. Accessed 31 July 2024
 7. Share3D Homepage. https://share3d.eu. Accessed 31 July 2024
 8. WEAVE Homepage. https://weave-culture.eu. Accessed 31 July 2024
 9. Brickley D., Guha R.V.: RDF Schema 1.1. W3C Recommendation (2022). http://www.w3.
    org/TR/rdf11-schema/
10. Dublin Core Metadata Initiative, One-to-One Principle. https://www.dublincore.org/resour
    ces/glossary/one-to-one_principle/. Accessed 31 July 2024
11. Medici M., et al.: D3.1 design of the CH cloud and 4CH platform. Technical report, 4CH
    (2022). https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7701438
12. Japanese Aritaware porcelain figure of a puppy, The Hunt Museum, Ireland, Public Domain.
    https://sketchfab.com/models/65cda809d508405f8d42f68801459a62/embed. Accessed 31
    July 2024
74        A. Isaac et al.

13. European Location Interoperability Solutions for e-Government (ELISE), Glossary. https://
    joinup.ec.europa.eu/collection/elise-european-location-interoperability-solutions-e-govern
    ment/glossary/term/digital-twin. Accessed 31 July 2024
14. Niccolucci, F., Felicetti, A., Hermon, S.: Populating the data space for cultural heritage with
    heritage digital twins. Data 7(8), 105 (2022). https://doi.org/10.3390/data7080105
15. Isaac, A. (ed.): Review of EDM to support 3D. Technical report, Common European data
    space for cultural heritage (2024). https://pro.europeana.eu/post/review-of-the-europeana-
    data-model-to-support-3d. Accessed 31 July 2024
16. The town of Wojsławice in 1930’s - 3D digital reconstruction, Grodzka Gate – NN The-
    atre, Poland, CC BY. https://www.europeana.eu/en/item/814/https___biblioteka_teatrnn_pl_
    dlibra_publication_edition_139444_content. Accessed 31 July 2024
17. Re-imagining Cappadocia as an Eco-District Architecture Competition Project Submission
    Deadline Extended. https://www.archdaily.com/999941/open-call-re-imagining-cappadocia-
    as-an-eco-district-architecture-competition. Accessed 31 July 2024
18. Entwurf für eine Raumgestaltung, MAK – Museum of Applied Arts, Austria, In Copyright.
    https://www.europeana.eu/en/item/15514/KI_14388_38. Accessed 31 July 2024
19. Fernie, K.: Sharing with Europeana: depositing and publishing 3D datasets for preservation
    and future access. Twin it! Webinar 5: Storing, managing and visualising the 3D models
    (2024).     https://europeana.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/EF/pages/2407170152/Twin+it+3D+
    for+Europe+s+culture+webinar+series#Webinar-5:-Storing,-managing-and-visualising-the-
    3D-models. Accessed 31 July 2024
20. Tsoupra E., Charles V., Stein R. (eds.): Recommendations for the representation of EDM:
    Event in Europeana. Technical report, Europeana Network Association (2021). https://pro.
    europeana.eu/project/data-quality-committee#representing-events-in-edm. Accessed 31 July
    2024
21. IDOVIR Homepage. https://idovir.com. Accessed 31 July 2024




Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and
indicate if changes were made.
     The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder.
