                       Data Synergy Call - Evaluation Questions



Interest &      How would you judge the cultural relevance and preservation need of the
Reusability     real-world heritage assets?
                1 - not very relevant and not important to preserve
                5 - extremely relevant and important to preserve
Interest &      How important are the heritage assets for different stakeholders and
Reusability     relevant to focus areas (i.e. young people, Eastern Partnership, disaster
                management, health, democracy) of the European Commission?
                1 - not very important
                5 - very important
Impact          What is the potential information and accessibility gain when publishing
                the digitized assets?
                1 - very low (due to already existing, public assets)
                5 - very high (due to new, potentially concealed assets)
Quantity        Which amount and variety of 3D assets will be contributed?
                1 - few similar assets
                5 - many different assets
Quality         How would you judge the appearance of the 3D assets in general?
                1 - very unalluring
                5 - very appealing
Quality         How would you judge the technical quality of the 3D assets in terms of
                accuracy and detail?
                [for reality-based assets]
                1 - The accuracy is very low and only one level of detail has been produced.
                5 - The accuracy is very high and multiple level of details have been
                produced.

                [for source-based assets]
                1 - The accuracy and details are much lower than the underlying sources
                allow it.
                5 - The accuracy and details are as high as the underlying sources allow it.
Scientificity   How clear has the digitization process been described in general?
                1 - not very comprehensible
                5 - very comprehensible
Scientificity   How would you evaluate the digitization process in terms of technical and
                scientific soundness?
                1 - The applied methods are outdated and not very appropriate.
                5 - The applied methods are state-of-the art and very appropriate.
Feasibility     How would you judge the capacity and experience of the applicant and
                project partner to fulfil the requirements of the call?
                1 - not very adequate and not very qualified
                5 - very adequate and very qualified
Feasibility     How well can the applicant and project partner manage any potential risks
                and obligations?
                1 - The project has high risks/many obligations that likely cannot be
                addressed.
                5 - The project has either no risks/obligations or small risks/few obligations
                that can easily be addressed.
Miscellaneous   Do you have any other comments on the project?
                Free text
