«Città e Storia», X, 2015, 2, pp. 261-280, doi: 10.17426/27829, ©2016 Università Roma Tre-CROMA




MAP PORTALS AND DATABASES OF TOWNS IN CENTRAL EUROPE
           AN APPENDIX OR SUBSTITUTE FOR
         PRINTED HISTORICAL TOWN ATLASES?*
                      Juraj Šedivý
                                       Univerzita Komenského v Bratislave


Abstract: In the past, historians offered their readers a depiction of urban history through city-
scapes, maps and plans (initially as illustrations to texts), followed by specialised historical town
atlases. The modern world then began to digitise printed works (first on CD/DVD and then on-
line). Gradually, online portals have emerged with two philosophies – a database (“encyclopaedia”:
i.e. the text comes first, supplemented with visual sources – including a cartographical represen-
tation) and a topography (a modern map as the underlying source overlaid with geo-referenced
historical maps, in certain cases with GIS-localised non-cartographic informational images). The
idea is to link both approaches through a comprehensive memory portal where the user selects
one of the two approaches using a filter (e.g. time, location and topic) or locates them on a map
(the relevant GIS-localised units will be displayed based on the selected historical or modern-type
map). Memory portals will offer more information than “just” atlases or “just” databases; they are
open, collaborative and more attractive for the generation of “digital natives”.
Keywords: Historical Town Atlases; Historical Topography; Data and Topographic Portals; Digitisation.


    The reconstruction and modernisation of war-torn centres of large historic
cities in Europe, accompanied by extensive archaeological excavations in the
western and eastern parts of central Europe (Germany, Austria, Poland, Czecho-
slovakia, Hungary and Romania), was the catalyst for the development of urban
historiography after the Second World War. The post-war departure of society
from rightist and elitist values to leftist ones (especially in the eastern part of the
region in question), together with the continuing urbanisation and influx of peo-
ple to towns connected with the post-war reconstruction of destroyed industry,
boosted public interest in the activities of urban historians. In the “socialist” part
of central Europe, the research of cities became one of the few less ideologically
problematic broader topics for historians of the more distant past since the his-
tory of the church and nobility had been ostracised as reactionary.

    * The term “central Europe” has yet to be defined, but in general, one can say it is the region
including Germany, Austria, Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Romania, and his-
torically the western part of Ukraine. In terms of available funds for urban research, there was
a visible difference between the western and the eastern part of central Europe.
    The research for this article was supported by the Slovak Research and Development Agency (APVV).
262                                          JURAJ ŠEDIVÝ


The institutional basis of urban research in central Europe
    It is not the purpose of this paper to summarise all of the central European
institutions which primarily deal with developments in urban history; therefore,
the following lines are just a broad outline1. The post-war boom of urban histo-
riography was not only displayed at a national level. In 1955 the International
Commission for the History of Towns (ICHT)2 was established, with the aim
of creating an academic network of urban historians and coordinating bibliog-
raphies, editions of resources and historical town atlases3. Approximately a dec-
ade later, specialised institutions focusing on urban history were established in
Germany. Due to strong regional scientific traditions and the splitting up of
the country, several scientific centres were immediately established there. The
Research Centre for Communal Sciences can perhaps be considered the oldest
(Kommunalwissenschaftliches Forschungszentrum, KWFZ – since 1973, renamed
as the Deutsches Institut für Urbanistik, or Difu). It was established in 1966 and is
headquartered in Berlin, having published the Informationen zur modernen Stadt-
geschichte (focusing on the 19th and 20th centuries) since 19704. Approximately
at the same time, a group called Die Alte Stadt, headquartered in Stuttgart (today
in Esslingen), was formed around Otto Borst, who started publishing a journal of
the same name in 1974 (renamed as Forum Stadt in 2010)5. In 1969 the Institute
for Comparative Urban History (Institut für vergleichende Städtegeschichte), led
by Heinz Stoob, was established at Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität in Mün-
ster, concentrating on the medieval and early modern periods. Under the long-
lasting baton of Peter Johanek, it has become the most important urban his-
torical centre in Germany, having published three various types (monographs,
guides and editions of historical sources) of scientific output since 1976, entitled


     1
       One of the latest works on the development of urban historiography in central Europe are
the proceedings of a conference Documenta Pragensia, XXXII, (=Města ve středověku a raném
novověku jako badatelské téma posledních dvou desetiletí / Städte im Mittelalter und in der frühen
Neuzeit als Forschungsthema in den letzten zwanzig Jahren), Praha, Archiv hl. města Prahy, 2013.
     2
       Alternative titles: Commission internationale pour l‘histoire des villes / Internationale Kommission
für Städtegeschichte. See http://www.historiaurbium.org/english/home_en.html (2015-05-05).
     3
       It informs about its activities and its members in a newsletter available at http://www.histori-
aurbium.org/english/bollett_en.html (2015-05-05). The European Association for Urban History
(http://www.eauh.eu) is a similar international organisation. However, it was only founded in 1989.
It organises conferences every two years and has four committee members from central Europe out
of a total of eighteen. Compared to ICHT, EAUH focuses more on urban history in the modern age.
     4
       See http://www.difu.de/geschichte (2015-05-05).
     5
       Die Alte Stadt. Vierteljahreszeitschrift für Stadtgeschichte, Stadtsoziologie, Denkmalpflege und
Stadtentwicklung. For more on this, see: http://www.steiner-verlag.de/Stadt/ (2015-05-05). This
continues under Forum Stadt: http://www.forum-stadt.eu/start (2015-05-05).
               MAP PORTALS AND DATABASES OF TOWNS IN CENTRAL EUROPE                          263

Städteforschung. Veröffentlichungen des Instituts für Vergleichende Städtegeschichte
in Münster, as well as two types of urban historical atlases (Germany and the
Rhineland)6. The initially modest number of such centres has increased over the
last 25 years primarily thanks to support from scientific grant agencies7.
    In Austria the Austrian Circle for Urban History Research (Österreichischer Ar-
beitskreis für Stadtgeschichtsforschung) in the Upper Austrian city of Linz, founded
by Wilhelm Rausch became the true urban historic institution in a broader geo-
graphic context. The Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Urban Research (Ludwig-
Boltzmann-Institut für Stadtgeschichtsforschung) established in 1975, also in Linz,
was personally linked to the circle and Rausch himself. The institute and the circle
were at the helm of Austrian urban historiography for several decades and coordi-
nated the bibliography of urban history in Austria (nearly 80,000 recorded indi-
vidual items), editions of historical sources (Elenchus fontium historiae urbanae),
and two projects of urban atlases (of Austria and Vienna); they have informed the
public about their activities in the Pro Civitate Austriae journal since 1985 and
have been organising scientific activities, including studies in an academic almanac
entitled “Contributions to the Urban History of Central Europe” (Beiträge zur
Geschichte der Städte Mitteleuropas), which has 25 volumes to date. Since 1995 the
institute has been based in Vienna, and the scientific circle was relocated there in
2012 as well. The troika of the most significant urban historical institutions also
includes the Viennese Urban and Country Archive, where Felix Czeike, Ferdinand
Opll and Peter Csendes have become important personalities8.
    Historians in the Eastern Bloc tried to establish an organisational base similar
to the western part of central Europe. The Commission for Urban History was
established in 1978 in Czechoslovakia at the Academy of Sciences (Jiří Kejř,
Josef Žemlička, and others), which primarily coordinated the publication of his-
torical atlases. Even before the split of the republic, it focused on the region of
today’s Czech Republic. Among the Czech scientific institutions, the Archive of
the Capital of Prague (V. Ledvinka, J. Pešek, O. Fejtová, and others) extensively
supports scientific conferences on urban history and their outputs by publishing
three different kinds of scientific publications: Documenta Pragensia (studies on

    6
      For more on this, see: http://www.uni-muenster.de/Staedtegeschichte/portal/einfuehrung/
Forschungstraditionen.html (2015-05-05).
    7
      For more on German urban history, see: P. Johanek, Die deutsche Forschung über die Städte
im Mittelalter und in der frühen Neuzeit in den letzten zwanzig Jahren. «Documenta Pragensia»,
XXXII/1, ed. Olga Fejtová et al. Praha : Scriptorium 2013, pp. 301-340.
    8
      For the newest summary of Austrian research: F. Opll, Österreichische Städte im Mittelalter
und in der Frühen Neuzeit als Forschungsthema der letzten zwanzig Jahre, «Documenta Pragensia»,
XXXII/1, Praha 2013, pp. 341-373.
264                                        JURAJ ŠEDIVÝ


urban history in central Europe), Documenta Pragensia Monographia (editions of
historical sources and analytical monographs), and the Prague Historical Almanac
(a yearly compendium of studies on Prague’s history)9. The second most impor-
tant urban archive – the Brno Archive, focuses mostly on Moravian towns and on
Brno itself10. Among the universities, the most prominent are Charles University
in Prague (which publishes the magazine Lidé města), and the University of J.
E. Purkyně in Ústí nad Labem, which publishes editions of historical sources.
A significant synthesis of the history of medieval Czech, Moravian and Silesian
towns has been published by František Hoffmann; an early modern history has
been published by Jaroslav Miller, and topographical and historical overviews
have been published by Karel Kuča and many others11.
    In Slovakia, the Section for Urban History of the Slovak Historical Society at
the Slovak Academy of Sciences was established in 1971, where Richard Marsina
and Vladimír Segeš were significant personalities. However, its activities were
limited to bi-annual conferences with a subsequent almanac of studies. Smaller
regionally-oriented centres are currently attached to universities in Bratislava (the
History of Bratislava 1-5 and the PamMap web portal), Trnava (editions of city
registers), and Košice (a specialised magazine called City and History [Mesto a
dejiny], which has been in publication since 2012)12.
    Research into the history of towns in Poland is coordinated by the Commis-
sion for the History of Towns at the Polish Academy of Sciences (Komisja Historii
Miast Komitetu Nauk Historycznych PAN). It has been organising conferences and
publishing conference almanacs since the 1970s. Nicolaus Copernicus University
in Torun (Roman Czaja, Krzysztof Mikulski and Jacek Wijczka), the Pedagogical
University of Cracow (Zdzisław Noga), the University of Wroclaw (Marta Mly-
narska-Kaletynowa, Rafał Eysymontt and Mateusz Goliński), and the University
of Warsaw (Henryk Samsonowicz13) are all centres of urban history research.

     Publication activities: http://www.ahmp.cz/index.html?mid=27&wstyle=0&page=%27%27 (2015-05-05).
      9

       Specific publications: http://www.archiv.brno.cz/index.php?nav01=1734&nav02=1739 (2015-05-05).
      10
    11
        For an overview of Czech urban historiography, see: O. Fejtová et al. (eds). Städte im
Mittelalter und in der frühen Neuzeit als Forschungsthema in den letzten zwanzig Jahren, «Documenta
Pragensia», XXXII/1, Praha 2013.
    12
       The most recent overview of relevant Slovak research can be found in: J. Lukačka, M.
Štefánik, Die Forschung zur Geschichte der mittelalterlichen Städte in der Slowakei während der letz-
ten zwanzig Jahre, «Documenta Pragensia», XXXII/1, pp. 411-428; E. Kowalská, Frühneuzeitliche
Städte als Forschungsthema in der slowakischen Historiographie der letzten zwei Jahrzehnte, Ibidem,
pp. 429-437.
    13
       This core figure of Polish urban historiography is still active. Just as the work of František
Hoffmann (Středověké město v Čechách a na Moravě, Praha, Lidové noviny, 1992) is essential
reading for the Czech lands, 20092 is a similar classic synthesis on the history of Polish towns:
               MAP PORTALS AND DATABASES OF TOWNS IN CENTRAL EUROPE                            265

There are also city archives in Warsaw and Cracow14. Since 2004, the Centre for
the Urban History of East-Central Europe exists in west Ukraine, and has func-
tioned as an academic institution, organising conferences and publishing works
on urban history; it has published its first atlas, and has mostly been researching
the Polish and Ukrainian region from a historical and geographical perspective15.
    In Hungary, urban history has been mapped by researchers for a long period.
Erik Fügedi and András Kubínyi were two of the big names in the second half of
the 20th century. Currently, research is centred around key personalities at uni-
versities e.g. (Katalin Szende at CEU Budapest, Vera Bácskai at ELTE Budapest,
István Poetrovics at the University of Szeged, Judit Majorossy at the University of
Vienna, and Károly Goda at the University of Münster). The Committee for Ur-
ban History at the Hungarian Academy of Sciences is a coordinating body. Similar
to such institutions in other countries, the Municipal Archive of Budapest is a
leading authority and publishes the Urbs – Hungarian Yearbook of Urban History
journal. Editions of historical sources are published in Hungary, as are atlases of
urban history. However, individual projects are not under the umbrella of a central
committee16. In Romania, the Commission of Town History was established in
1992 under the guidance of the Romanian Academy of Sciences (Comisia de Istorie
a Oraşelor din România)17. It publishes the Historia urbana journal (V. Ciobanu
and D. Iacob), editions of historical sources, and historical atlases of Romanian
towns (D. Iacob). Since 1992 it has been organising one or two colloquia every year
on various topics of urban history.

Historical Town Atlases
   Along with textual works (analytical studies, syntheses and editions), the above-
mentioned institutions and researchers have been interested in another significant
tool of urban historiography over the past fifty years – historical town atlases, which
are supposed to cover towns and their surroundings and visually present cultural
phenomena in a location and the surrounding countryside. These first historical


H. Samsonowicz, M. Bogucka, Dzieje miast i mieszczaństwa w Polsce przedrozbiorowej, Wroclaw-
Warszawa-Krakow, Ossolineum, 1986.
    14
       For Polish research, see the historic and graphic overview by Urszula Sowina, Zdzisław Noga
and Andzej Klonder in «Documenta Pragensia XXXII/1», Praha 2013, pp. 495-511, 513-527,
529-555.
    15
       For basic information, go to: http://www.lvivcenter.org/en/ (2015-05-05).
    16
       For a recent overview, see: I. H. Németh, K. Szende, Research on the Town of Medieval and
Early Modern Hungary since 1989, «Vana Talinn», XXV(XXIX), 2014, pp. 266-294.
    17
       P. Niedermaier, Comisia de istorie a oraşelor din România la 20 ani, «Historia Urbana», XXI,
2013, pp. 5-14 (also available at www.ceeol.com).
266                                        JURAJ ŠEDIVÝ


and topographic depictions of the past had their roots in the 16th to 18th centuries
(e.g. maps of historic Jerusalem and Rome)18. It is rather significant that the old-
est urban atlases included works from German regions, which have subsequently
played an important role in the publishing of atlases. The abrupt boom of atlases in
the last two decades of the 20th century perhaps echoed the “iconic turn” of West-
ern civilisation some one to two generations ago. The onset of historical atlases in
the 1970s and 1980s was much easier in the western part of the continent; academ-
ics in the socialist part of central Europe ran into difficulties, as many maps and
aerial photographs were kept from them by the authorities. As a result, they only
caught up with their counterparts in Germany and Austria in the last two decades
of the 20th century. In the evolution of historical atlases, one can detect several
phases: classical printing methods and outputs were used approximately until the
mid-1990s; afterwards, the maps were processed using digital graphics, and still
published in printed format. In the last decade, one can gradually see entire atlases
being made accessible electronically via the Internet, leading to current web portals
offering more than the classical atlases19.
    Under the influence of ICHT, a relatively standard format of atlases has crys-
tallised since the end of the 1960s (these standards were set at meetings in Oxford
in 1968 and in Münster in 1995). The format is composed of two parts: introduc-
tory textual studies outlining urban development and then the principal carto-
graphic element. This is created from a redrawn city plan including information
taken from land registries from the pre-industrial period marking out plots (the
scheme is usually from the mid-19th century and to a scale of 1:2500), a map of
the vicinity of the town, if possible, from the same period (1:25,000/1:50,000),
and a current urban plan with lots (1:5000) as well as reconstruction maps of
urban and borough development (1:5000)20. The collection is complemented
with other thematic maps capturing selected social and economic phenomena,
providing there are sufficient resources and research (e.g. the size of medieval
parishes, taxes paid on individual buildings, the jobs of individual taxpayers, and


       M. Conzen, Retrieving the Pre-industrial Built Environments of Europe: the Historic Towns Atlas
      18

Program and Comparative Morphological Study, «Urban Morphology», XII, 2008, 2, pp. 143-156: 144.
    19
       E. Chodějovská, E. Semotanová, Dějiny měst, ikonografické a kartografické prameny, metody
a výstupy v posledním dvacetiletí (Urban history, iconographic and cartographic sources, methods
and results from the past two decades), Documenta Pragensia XXXII/2, 2013, pp. 293-311.
    20
       In his paper Should the Historic Towns Atlas Continue Beyond 1900? (http://www.his-
toriaurbium.org/english/Opll_Atlases%20beyond%201900_ENGLISH_SIMMS_24112012.
pdf ), F. OPLL pointed out the need to complement the maps and include further periods: the
reproduction of the plan at the turn of the 20th century, from the 1920s, and from the 1950s
(at 1:5/10/25,000 – depending on the size of the city).
               MAP PORTALS AND DATABASES OF TOWNS IN CENTRAL EUROPE                            267

paths and path management). Facsimiles of historical maps, plans and drawings
of the town are part of the atlases as well. Individual national editions slightly
differ in format and content. However, thanks to internationally enforced basic
standards, their structure is similar and, at least within national projects, the
atlases capture towns in maps and plans from the same period (e.g. in the Czech
project, towns are depicted in Müller’s 1720 map of Bohemia, his 1716 map of
Moravia, the map of the first military survey from the 1760s to the 1780s, the
map of the second military survey in the first two thirds of the 19th century,
and the stable land registry from the 1820s to the 1840s as well as in modern
orthophoto maps). Similar to large syntheses, atlases usually have an institutional
background as they are produced by teams based at academies and universities.
Thanks to this commitment, a creditworthy set of atlases has been compiled
since the 1970s21. In central Europe, Germany (256) and Austria (63+17) play
a major role in terms of town atlases. Roughly twenty have been published in
Poland and in the Czech Republic; Romania and Hungary have added their own
initial sets recently, while Slovakia is still working on its own project22.
    German historians were among the first to publish historical atlases of towns
in central Europe. In addition to the national set (Deutscher Städteatlas, pub-
lished since 1973; Deutscher Historischer Städteatlas, published since 2006), there
are three regional town atlases – the Westphalian Series (Westfälischer Städteat-
las), the Rhineland Series (Rheinischer Städteatlas), and the Hessian Series (Hes-
sischer Städteatlas). The first two projects have been handled by the Institut für
vergleichende Städtegeschichte at the University of Münster (initiated by Heinz
Stoob and later headed by Peter Johanek). The Rhineland Series project is equally
old, initiated by Edith Ennen (Amt für rheinische Landeskunde, Bonn). The Hes-
sian Series is the youngest regional project (published by the Hessisches Landesamt
für geschichtliche Landeskunde, Marburg – Ursula Braasch-Schwersmann). The
total number of published atlases in Germany is close to 300, with a preference
for larger and mid-sized towns23. The Münster centre offers interactive on-line
digital urban atlases on its web page, in addition to printed atlases (for example,
Braunschweig, more of which you can find in Daniel Stracke’s work).
    In Austria, there have been two projects of historical atlases in existence since
1981 – the Austrian Town Atlas (Österreichischer Städteatlas) and, due to its size

   21
       For a general information on the development, see: E. Chodějovská, S. GeaRty, D. Stracke
in the introduction to this issue.
    22
       A set of atlases was compiled by Ferdinand Opll as early as 1995; the initial author is cur-
rently followed by Sarah Gearty and Jennifer Moor. See http://www.ria.ie/research/ihta/european-
project.aspx (2015-05-05).
    23
       Ibidem.
268                                        JURAJ ŠEDIVÝ


and significance, a separate atlas of the capital Vienna (Historischer Atlas von Wien).
Even though there is a smaller number of towns covered in Austrian atlases when
compared to Germany, their nationwide distribution is more even; in Germany
such atlases are concentrated in only two out of its thirteen states. The project cov-
ers the development of larger cities with over 100 thousand inhabitants (such as
Graz, Linz and Innsbruck), mid-sized towns with tens of thousands of inhabitants
(such as Wiener Neustadt and Eisenstadt), and smaller towns such as Marchegg,
Rust and Freistadt. The Austrian Circle for Urban History Research, the Ludwig
Boltzmann Institute for Urban Research and the Viennese City and Regional Ar-
chive, as well as several dozen individual authors, have been involved in their pub-
lication. Initially, atlases by Ferdinand Opll appeared frequently, whereas Susanne
C. Pils has been the most active author in the past decade. A compendium of all the
atlases published until 2008 was published in 2009 on DVD24. All the published
volumes are userfriendly available online25. Austrian urban historians, assisted by
the Hungarian company Arcanum, have made the extensive third military surveys
of the entire Habsburg Monarchy available online (www.mapire.eu).
    In the Czech part of what was Czechoslovakia, the concept of the first atlas
(Litoměřice) was designed by J. Macek, J. Tomas and J. Smetana as early as 1980.
However, the project was only put into action a decade later26. In 1995, the first
volume of the Historical Town Atlas of the Czech Republic (Historický atlas měst
České republiky: in Czech, along with an extensive German and English summa-
ry) was published, and some 25 more had been added by 2014 (Pardubice, České
Budějovice, Hradec Králové, Jihlava, Český Krumlov, Kutná Hora, and Mikulov
are among the better known ones). Josef Žemlička, Robert Šimůnek and Eva
Semotanová can be considered the moving forces behind this project, and Eva
Chodějovská remains a prominent figure; all of them are from the Institute of
History at the Czech Academy of Sciences. Similarly to Vienna, Prague is domi-
nant over other Czech municipalities in terms of its significance. However, in
contrast to their Austrian counterparts, the Czech authors listed it in the national
register; so far, printed atlases of three Prague boroughs have been published:
Libeň, Královské Vinohrady and Smíchov. The atlas of Plzeň is available online
as an e-book27. Just like Münster, the Czech centre offers an interactive atlas of

    24
       Österreichischer Städteatlas Lieferungen 1-10 (1982-2008). In collaboration with Arcanum,
Budapest (2009). See http://www.arcanum.hu/.
    25
       See http://www.wien.gv.at/kultur/archiv/kooperationen/lbi/staedteatlas/mappe.html (2015-05-05).
    26
       E. Semotanová, J. Smetana, J. Žemlička, Úvodem k první pětici svazků Historického atlasu měst
České republiky, http://www.hiu.cas.cz/cs/download/mapova-sbirka/uvod-1_5.pdf (2015-05-05).
    27
       However, not all copyrights to all maps have been secured: https://www.plzen.eu/obcan/o-
meste/multimedia/ebook/knihy/ebook-historicky-atlas.aspx (2015-05-05).
              MAP PORTALS AND DATABASES OF TOWNS IN CENTRAL EUROPE                        269

Prague and its city boroughs on the map portal of the Historical Town Atlas of
the Czech Republic28.
    In Poland, eighteen volumes of a project entitled Atlas Historyczny Miast Pol-
skich have been published since 1993 (in two languages, also known as His-
torischer Atlas Polnischer Städte)29. Nicolaus Copernicus University has edited part
of the project (Roman Czaja and Antoni Czacharowski). The analysed cities are
concentrated in the western part of Poland (the former Prussia: Toruń, Braniewo,
Bydgoszcz, and others), Kujawy and Masuria. As part of the project, the first
volume of the Cracow atlas was published, edited by Z. Noga. The atlases of
Silesian towns (featuring Wrocław and four smaller cities) were published by the
University of Wroclaw and were edited by Marta Mlynarska-Kaletynowa and Ra-
fal Eysymontt. Our Polish colleagues are also planning the publication of tradi-
tional atlases in electronic format30. In 2014, the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences
published their first historical atlas of Lviv (edited by Myron Kapral)31. This atlas
includes 11 map reconstructions, 25 facsimiles, 6 historical townscapes and an
extensive text.
    Since 2000, seven volumes of Atlasului Istoric al Oraşelor din România (in
German known as Städtegeschichteatlas Rumänien) have been published in Ro-
mania, divided according to historic regions into Series A: Moldova (2), Series
B: Tara Romanesca (3), and Series C: Transylvania (2)32. Sibiu can be considered
the most active centre, and Paul Niedermaier and Dan Dumitru Iacob are the
main moving forces behind the project there. The Romanian atlases include in-
troductory texts concerning the landscape, a chronology of the most important
events in a town’s history, demographic development, urban planning, architec-
ture, descriptions of the town in historical sources, archaeological discoveries,
street names, and a bibliography as well as historical maps (first, second and third
military surveys, as well as other local maps and plans, mostly from the 18th to
the 20th centuries and excluding current maps).
    Hungarian urban historians joined their counterparts in 2010 by publishing
two catalogues of the Hungarian Atlas of Historic Towns (Magyar Várostörténeti
Atlasz), which was edited by the Committee for the History of Towns at the

    28
       See footnote 25. In addition, the City Archive has published the Prague Plan from 1840-
1842 and 1856 based on indicative sketches and surveys of the stable land registry.
    29
       See http://rcin.org.pl/dlibra/publication?id=70534&tab=3 (2015-05-05).
    30
       Courtesy of Prof. Z. Noga (Cracow).
    31
       Basic information can be found at: http://www.lvivcenter.org/en/ (2015-05-05).
    32
       2000: Sighişoara, 2004: Sebeş, 2005: Suceava, 2006: Târgovişte, 2008: Câmpulung, 2010:
Siret, and 2013: Brăila. More information can be found at: http://www.icsusib.ro/main/index.ph
p?s=25ad0cce93e8a0a2dbd3bd80cb647c67&f=change&idroot=8 (2015-05-05).
270                                     JURAJ ŠEDIVÝ


Hungarian Academy of Sciences. András Kubínyi was the leading figure in this
project. He was succeeded after his death by Katalin Szende and István Tringli.
The first volume (2010: Sopron) already indicated a highly ambitious project.
After an extensive introductory text, a classical set follows (a 1:2500 redrawn
land registry map from 1856, a 1:50,000 city vicinity in the first and the second
military surveys, a 1:5000 topographic development from medieval times until
the 18th century, and a 1:5000 modern city plan), followed by 21 thematic maps
(starting with medieval altar prebends to real estate prices in the 18th century
and a modern map of protected monuments and objects). Axonometric projec-
tions are shown in the accompanying material (dealing with the Roman and early
Hungarian periods) and the cityscapes33. After having completed Sopron and Sá-
toraljaújhely, the authors are now working on atlases of Buda and Kecskemét34.
    Overall, when talking about central European town atlases, one can state that
as a rule they are based on modern state boundaries, even though towns once
belonged to various other units. The projects are mostly under the umbrella of
national academies of sciences in collaboration with universities and the archives
of (mainly) capital cities. In terms of structure, they apply international standards
and feature a user-friendly bonus: they are published in two languages (firstly the
national language and then a second language, with German prevailing here over
English), or they at least feature an extensive second-language summary. Similar-
ly to elsewhere in Europe, the authors of the atlases are currently at a crossroads
known as the “transition from the printed to the digital town atlas”.

Changes in historiographical discourses
    Due to the changed post-war paradigms of historiography, extensive syntheses
published in the 1950s covering the issues of the origins of medieval towns, their
definitions and nature, as well as the continuity of ancient and medieval urban
forms, caught the attention of experts in the field as well as the wider public (Edith
Ennen in 1953; Hans Planitz in 1954 and several others). The next breakthrough
in the development of European urban historiography came in the 1970s. Since
then more quantitative methods have been used by urban historians: e.g. evalua-
tions of register sources focusing on the management of cities and townspeople,
the social topography of towns, and historical town atlases. At the same time, in
addition to medieval urban history, more recent periods have also attracted the
attention of urban historians. The third most significant change in the approach

   33
      J. Ferenc, J. Kűskan, K. Szende (eds.), Sopron (=Magyar Várostörténeti Atlasz 1), Sopron,
Archives and Museum, 2010.
   34
      I. Tringli (ed.), Sátoraljaújhely (=Magyar Várostörténeti Atlasz 2), Budapest, MTA, 2011.
                MAP PORTALS AND DATABASES OF TOWNS IN CENTRAL EUROPE                             271

of urban historians was caused by the massive onslaught of computer technology
towards the end of the 20th century. The wish to access information fast and the
current visible shift in the perception of the younger generation (Marc Prensky
has characterised them as “digital natives”)35 poses a legitimate question, namely
whether the “monologue” format of classical historical work (be it text-based and
built on the rational and Enlightenment tradition, or image-based and appearing
as a finished and mostly printed work) will remain attractive and intelligible for
future generations of the urban history readers, or whether new approaches to
the explanation of urban history will have to be sought. What impact will inter-
active and visually attractive databases, topography and general historical portals
have upon the historiography of towns?
    The change seems to be fundamental: whereas today’s fortysomethings have
been accustomed to using verified information (e.g. scientific encyclopaedias and
academic dictionaries) and studying a large amount of baseline material (e.g.
research reports) before formulating a hypothesis, the “digital generation of the
21st century” (today’s teenagers up to thirtysomethings) is willing to reach out to
semi-professional and even amateur sources of information for the sake of speed,
thus making conclusions based on little information (“Wikipedisation”). The
digital generation prefers shorter multi-source information (hypertext and mul-
titasking) to a gradually constructed single story (a linear text from one source).
Readers and e-books (as well as the Internet itself ) are all proof that the printed
word lost its battle with digital text a long time ago. Print can only be kept if it
is attached to an image – either static (graphics and photography) or dynamic
(video) – which is a consequence of the decline of slow reading in favour of the
fast perception of images (the so-called “iconic turn”). As opposed to solitary
scientists working in the silence of their studies, “digital natives” have become
used to working through a network (informally via Skype, or scientifically via
Academia.edu or other such portals). The past need for private space (in the
scholarly field as well: publication of long-term research only after its comple-
tion) has been replaced with the public space, with “sharing”, the presentation
of “work in progress”, abstracts, and presentations available online. In this “com-
plementary” sense, competent web portals are clearly winning over completed
(printed or online) works as far as one’s “eyeballs” are concerned. Naturally, this


    35
      Prensky was one of the first to do research into the different perceptions of the world held by
digital immigrants (an analogy with people who have had to learn how to operate IT) and digital
natives (those born into the IT world). See Prensky, Marc: Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants. In:
«On the Horizon», IX, 2001, Nos. 5 and 6, pp. 1-6. Available at http://www.emeraldinsight.com/
doi/abs/10.1108/10748120110424816 (28. 2. 2015).
272                                         JURAJ ŠEDIVÝ


is not an insurmountable gap between the old and the young generation; rather,
it is about the “new” and the “old” approach – two different discussions that have
been influencing each other all the time.

The digital environment and historic map portals
    Digital access to information has been a serious challenge for long-term edi-
tion projects for at least the past two decades. In the first decade of this century,
it seemed sufficient to make the original printed work digitally available in a one-
off medium (CD/DVD). The Austrian Town Atlas (a DVD with atlases from
1982 to 2008) and the Hungarian project (a DVD appendix to a printed atlas,
2010f.)36 took this path. However, only online solutions have been considered
recently. The easiest of these to make the original printed and published work
into a digital version, and then make it available on the Internet; another ap-
proach is through smaller or larger adjustments using the features of the digital
environment. In the case of the Czech Plzeň atlas, a simple “switchover” was
chosen; Plzeň became the European Capital of Culture in 2015, and one can leaf
through the e-book of the historical atlas of the town37. The Hessischer Städteatlas
opted for a similar solution by offering all atlases published until 2012 as part of
the project in a user-friendly PDF format38. The benefits of these solutions for
users include quick access to information (compared with the printed version,
the electronic versions allow browsing) and a saving on purchasing costs. Such
a simple approach could be a temporary and particularly cheap solution for the
online publishing of older atlases that were published before digital technology
was used for the processing of the underlying material.
    The advantage of using newer atlases from the 1980s and 1990s is the use of
vectorised images that can be switched on and off. This feature is being used by
the interactively designed atlas of the German town of Braunschweig, edited by
Daniel Stracke (Münster). In three underlying maps on a small, medium and
large scale, the user can click on information that would have been included in
separate thematic map sheets in the printed format (evolution maps and themat-
ic maps of waterways, historic roads, and fortifications). Compared to the simple
PDF format or e-books, this solution already uses the advantage of the digital
environment (the interactive overlaying of an individual layers option)39. The

      See footnote 32.
      36

      The e-book is not comprehensive because there are not copyrights to all of the maps: https://
      37

www.plzen.eu/obcan/o-meste/multimedia/ebook/knihy/ebook-historicky-atlas.aspx (2015-05-05).
   38
      See http://www.lagis-hessen.de/de/subjects/browse/sn/statl (2015-05-05).
   39
      See http://www.uni-muenster.de/Staedtegeschichte/Forschung/interaktive_Kartographie_Braunschweig.
html (2015-05-05).
              MAP PORTALS AND DATABASES OF TOWNS IN CENTRAL EUROPE                        273

map portal of the Historical Town Atlas of the Czech Republic, managed by Eva
Chodějovská and technically supported by Jiří Krejčí, has an analogical concept.
    An interesting solution is delivered by a simple connection of geo-referenced
historical maps with the current cartographic underlying document using opac-
ity. The number of map portals with such solutions that are not actually histori-
cal atlases in the standard sense is growing, especially in Bohemia. Outside of the
framework of the Historical Town Atlas of the Czech Republic, historical atlases
for Plzeň, Kladno, Kutná Hora and Most started popping up on the Internet,
and probably independently, as they differ from each other in terms of method-
ology. Towns have made geo-referenced plans, historical maps and aerial views
available in digital format40. As far as the size of the covered area is concerned,
the joint project of the Austrian State Archive in Vienna and Arcanum is at the
forefront. The project partners are offering three military surveys (1763-1887) of
the entire Habsburg Monarchy (today’s territories of Austria, the Czech Repub-
lic, Hungary and Slovakia as well as parts of Poland, Ukraine, Romania, Serbia,
Croatia, Slovenia and Italy as well as Austrian Netherlands) and specifically the
territory of the Hungarian Kingdom (1869-1887). The maps can be browsed
and used naturally to track the historic country as well as towns and their sur-
roundings. A user-friendly feature is that a location can be entered in various
languages (e.g. “Bratislava” in Slovak, “Pressburg” in German, and “Pozsony” in
Hungarian), and the icing on the cake is that the authors also offer 3D imagery
using Google Earth41. The Czech project StareMapy.cz (OldMaps) and its Slovak
analogy (Staré mapy.sk) are analogical, although less elaborate projects42.
    As opposed to the relatively simple overlapping of historical and current
maps, some portals offer other improvements. For instance, the Historical Town
Atlas of the Czech Republic (as well as some smaller projects, such as the one for
the city of Most) employ the possibility of inserting historical or modern-day im-
agery of significant topographic units into the cartographic image (e.g. important
buildings or streets in vintage postcards and photographs).
    The creators of the Historisch-topographischer Atlas schlesischer Städte43 have
gone a step further. The authors offer online access to two processed locations
out of 34 potential towns in the territory of today’s Poland and the Czech Re-
public (parts of the historic Silesian region), namely Zgorzelec and Opole. One

   40
       Plzeň: http://gis.plzen.eu/staremapy/; Kladno offers only the second and third military
surveys and an orthophoto map dating from 1951. See: http://kladno.gepro.cz/OUT/HTML/
MISYS3; Kutná Hora: http://www.kutnahora.cz/mapserv/history/; (2015-05-05).
    41
       See http://mapire.eu/de/ (2015-05-05).
    42
       See http://www.staremapy.sk (2015-05-05).
    43
       See https://www.herder-institut.de/staedteatlas_schlesien/atlas.html (2015-05-05).
274                                    JURAJ ŠEDIVÝ




Fig. 1 - http://gis.mesto-most.cz/mostdominulosti/index.html. On this orthophoto map of
Most, there are icons which allow access to imagery from other periods (the image above show
an orthophoto map from 1938 and the photograph of a shopping centre from the 1970s).

can immediately appreciate that the menu is – as is common in central Europe
– provided in several languages. In both towns, the atlas offers a textual section
(geographical position, population, and history) and a cartographic section (his-
torical maps without overlaying modern maps, text commentary, the develop-
ment of inhabitation, and vignettes). In Zgorzelec, the authors even offer a short
video trailer with 3D visualisations depicting the topographic evolution of the
town. This extraordinary didactic teaching aid is turning into something that is
somehow a shortcoming in classical town atlases, whose sophistication is not at-
tractive to interested intellectuals who are not historians and those who are not
urban experts. Despite their shortcomings, the Prague portal and the presenta-
tion of Zgorzelec offer multimediality as an important tool to make historical
town atlases more attractive. Contrary to the printed format, the digital environ-
ment can apply static as well as accompanying dynamic imagery (including video
footage and interactive 3D models).
                MAP PORTALS AND DATABASES OF TOWNS IN CENTRAL EUROPE                    275




Fig. 2 - Picture: https://www.herder-institut.de/staedteatlas_schlesien/atlas.html. A 3D re-
construction of Zgorzelec planted into a military map.


    On a different note, a discussion allegedly took place in London at the end of
the 19th century which suggested that the intense growth of horses pulling carts
would mean that in one to two decades the city would no longer be able to re-
move the resulting excrement. Then cars came along, and the issue was resolved.
It is possible that the philosophy of historical atlases could be reconsidered in a
new way: a way that will link previously independent ways of explaining history
– both in text and images (books with illustrations or documentary and period
film footage) – along with the cartographic material.
    Having discussed cartographic projects, let us now detour to databases of
urban history which work with text and (mainly) imagery. The online Ency-
clopaedia of the History of Brno (Encyklopedie dějin města Brna), established in
2004, is one of the oldest of its type in central Europe44. It offers a “Wikipedian”

   44
        See http://encyklopedie.brna.cz/home-mmb/ (2015-05-05).
276                                        JURAJ ŠEDIVÝ




Fig. 3 - Results for a search in the Topothek.at.


view of Brno’s history from two main focal points: events and locations (!) It is
the advantage of databases like this that they offer a meta-archive (digitised items
with metadata of historic sources drawn from a great number of relevant memory
institutions, such as the city museum, archives, gallery, and library) whose entries
are commented upon by academic experts as well as volunteers (personal observ-
ers and owners of sources who provide them for digitisation) who can take part in
the project in a collaborative effort. The recipient is then a user, not just a reader.
    A similar database has been available at Wien Geschichte Wiki45 since 2014. In
the case of Vienna, this is essentially a purposefully fragmented version of His-
torisches Lexikon Wien by Felix Cseike which has been adapted for the purposes
of the Internet. New formats of memory entities (non-text-based source types,

      45
           See https://www.wien.gv.at/wiki/index.php/Wien_Geschichte_Wiki (2015-05-05).
                MAP PORTALS AND DATABASES OF TOWNS IN CENTRAL EUROPE                  277

such as images and maps) are added to the core text of the project. In a certain
way, such databases can be an inspiration for the new generation of digital town
atlases. Just as these databases are shifting towards topography, map portals are
being complemented and new database elements are being added.
    The most advanced town databases available to date that have made the first
tiny steps towards becoming a town atlas could be the Austrian Topothek and
the Slovak PamMap46. The Topothek is a dynamic and a fast growing project that
creates sub-databases for individual locations (mostly villages as well as smaller
cities) and which features an identical structure. Users can select miscellaneous
historical sources according to their own interests (objects, images, video and au-
dio material, and documents) and text commentary from a relevant time period:
e.g. a user wants video sources from the Second World War for Wien-Triestervi-
ertel. The results are then shown on a modern Google-style map.
    It is only a small step from the Topothek to then hyperlinking databases and to-
pography, and creating a comprehensive memory portal. A beta-version of such a pro-
ject for the Slovak capital Bratislava has been available since the summer of 2015 at
www.pammap.sk (PamMap – Pamäť mesta Bratislavy – Memory of the City of Brati-
slava). PamMap is an acronym composed of Slovak words (PAM = pamäť [memory]
for the database elements, and MAP = mapa [map] for the cartographic approach). It
expresses the main philosophy of the project; namely, the option for the user to make
either a database or cartographic enquiry on one portal. The structure of the database
section is near completion, and the user can search relevant results (memory entities)
in urban history through a requested source type (object / writing / graphics / pho-
tographs / postcards / 3D visualisation / audio / video) while also specifying the time
(e.g. 1914-1918), location (e.g. street name), historical event, personality, topics (e.g.
Germanicum, Judaicum, transportation or the Catholic Church), and the source of
memory institutions (e.g. the Municipal Archive of Bratislava or the Private Collec-
tion of XY). This all means that the user can select, for example, photographs of the
Main Square in Bratislava taken by Joseph Hofer which are stored in the municipal
archive and are dated between 1930 and 1945.
    The memory items are localised using a GIS, and thus a similar selection can
be achieved through map access as well: users can overlay a historical map onto a
modern-day Google Map and choose the opacity. Similarly to Prague, “pinned”
icons with memory items related to the location in question will be displayed. By
clicking on icons localised on the Main Square, users can access specific digitised
items with the respective metadata. The objective is to display only the relevant
items for a particular period.

   46
        See http://www.topothek.at/ or www.PamMap.sk (2015-05-05).
278                                    JURAJ ŠEDIVÝ




Fig. 4 - The PamMap comprehensive memory portal. Results of a map search for individually
chosen criteria (material – photo; theme – water transport; period – 1919–1939). The results
are shown on a selected historic map (in this case from 1931) on the background of a modern
Google Map with the possibility to adjust the opacity.
               MAP PORTALS AND DATABASES OF TOWNS IN CENTRAL EUROPE                            279

    A selection using the map will be more suitable for topographically oriented
enquiries. For example, if an archaeologist is looking for all discoveries from
the Bronze Age found in water sources as potential sacrificial gifts, he can over-
lay the modern map with the first or second military surveys that captured the
country in the pre-industrial period, and then he can follow all the discoveries
localised near springs and wells on the territory of the modern city. This phi-
losophy could bring a practically unlimited number of requests for atlases from
users. For example, after medieval tax registers are processed, historians will be
able to detect where in a city taxpayers with the name “Hungarus” or “Wiener”
lived. Once census records from the 19th century including information on
inhabitants’ employment have been added, users will be able to find out where
tailors and blacksmiths were located. Similarly, an ethnologist will be able to
select some Judaica images (photos, postcards or graphic art) from the first
half of the 20th century, which will certainly be concentrated around a Jewish
ghetto. While printed atlases offer maps with selected topics, and interactive
atlases (e.g. Braunschweig) offer limited or pre-selected interactivity, the new
philosophy of comprehensive memory portals should allow for (nearly) any
combination of various enquiries.
    There are several pitfalls in this development, which ends with the historical
and geographical “Aleph”47. One such problem is how financially demanding and
laborious such projects can be. The PamMap project has overcome both issues
through donations and the collaboration of volunteers. However, collaboration
with the general public is both an aid and a concern. “Post-modern” history
(including portals such as PamMap) is, to a certain extent, an open work, not
just according to Umberto Eco’s definition, but also literally. They are open to
sources which are brought in by volunteers; other people digitise it, and then
other people furnish it with metadata, including GIS-positioning, on modern-
type maps. Others contribute financially to maintaining the server, and so on.
Therefore, where there is a lack of funding to achieve the professionalism of col-
laborators, there is a real threat of amateurism (i.e. “Wikipedisation”). However,
the advantage of such comprehensive memory portals, along with their interac-
tivity, multimedia and openness, is their emotional side, which is in contrast to
“big history”, for example, in the phases of a city siege, a stage in the growth of
the city, or the regulation of the embankments of the town. “Small history” of-

    47
       In a novelette by Jorge Luis Borges, a writer of magical realism, “Aleph” is something that
contains all the other points in the universe, and anyone who gazes into it can see everything. For
the English translation, see: http://www.phinnweb.org/links/literature/borges/aleph.html (2015-
05-05).
280                                 JURAJ ŠEDIVÝ


fers more statements and pictures made by specific people along with their stories
and their emotional audio and video memories.
     Comprehensive memory portals can be extremely attractive, especially if you
think of how much time generations of digital natives are able to spend on social
networks and in the virtual world of computer games. The creation of similar
memory portals will happen more often, and not only in central Europe. In ad-
dition to this, one can already see networking taking place in the creation of sister
databases with an identical formal structure of the digital platform: e.g. the 48
sub-databases of local municipalities in Lower Austria, 15 in Upper Austria, 2 in
Burgenland, 5 of boroughs in Vienna, 1 of a location in Croatia, and 2 in Bavaria
which are all associated with Topothek.at. An application for a European grant
for the partial connection of entities up to 1945 in memory portals in Slovakia
(PamMap) and Austria (Topothek) with databases in the Czech Republic (The
Encyclopaedia of Brno) and Hungary (The Hungarian National Archive) has
been submitted. If this comes to fruition, we would get to the point that the
ICHT wanted to achieve thanks to the comparison of atlases. We would be able
to compare the development of individual cities in central Europe. However, it
is important to professionally follow data topography and to initiate and assess
it. Just like when standards were created for the metadata description of digitised
charters (TEI – Text Encoding Initiative) or manuscripts (TEI-MASTER DTD),
one needs to think about the standards applicable for the structuring of com-
prehensive memory portals, and, if possible, provide geo-references for modern
maps and make old maps which lack the possibility of being linked to modern
cartographic systems at least available in an image format, and then place all
types of sources for underlying maps using geo-referencing and other methods.
Given the fast development of the digital environment, we shall see whether
comprehensive memory portals are a saviour or a dead-end for historical towns
atlases as well.
