Advancing 3D Digital Heritage: 3DBigDataSpace Takes
Key Steps Forward
[12 March 2025, Vienna] – The 3DBigDataSpace project, a groundbreaking European initiative
focused on advancing 3D digital heritage, deﬁned key milestones and upcoming activities during
its kick-off meeting in Trento, Italy, hosted by project partner FBK (Fondazione Bruno Kessler).
The project, which aims to enhance the accessibility, preservation, and utilization of 3D cultural
heritage assets, is making signiﬁcant progress across its various work packages.




                  The consortium partners lining up, eager to kick off the project.


Enhancing Data Processing and Validation
One of the project’s major achievements will be the successful aggregation of over 50,000 3D
models and to ensure metadata accuracy and smooth integration into the common European
data space for cultural heritage.

Strong interconnections between work packages shall ensure robust data processing pipelines,
with a focus on metadata quality and validation methods. The team is actively working on
deﬁning automated and manual validation approaches, ensuring high-quality and reliable 3D
data outputs.

Creating Engaging 3D Experiences
Work is also commencing on developing immersive 3D experiences using the collected models.
The project partners intend to align different demo cases with available toolsets, ensuring that
technological and content-related dependencies are well-managed.
 Training, Events, and Future Prospects
 To maximize impact, the 3DBigDataSpace project is planning a series of workshops and training
 events, to enhance knowledge-sharing within the digital heritage community. The ﬁrst event is
 coming up in May, in Austria:

     •   CIPA Summer School 2025 ”Digitisation of Built Heritage at Risk” from 20-25 May 2025,
         under the lead of the Department for the History of Architecture and Building
         Archaeology of the University of Technology Vienna, and in close cooperation with
         ICOMOS, ISPRS, CHNT ICOMOS Austria, and supported by Time Machine Organisation
         (TMO). The 14th instalment of the “CIPA Summer School” invites young scholars,
         emerging professionals, and heritage enthusiasts to explore cutting-edge methods in
         heritage documentation and risk assessment at the historic, baroque castle of
         Heiligenkreuz-Gutenbrunn in Lower Austria – a remarkable site currently facing a variety
         of challenges due to its lack of a dedicated function.
         Registration and further information can be found here:
         https://www.timemachine.eu/cipa-summer-school-2025/

 Looking Ahead
 The next steps for the project include the deﬁnition of testing methodologies for validation and
 continuing the development of immersive 3D applications. The 3DBigDataSpace team remains
 committed to pushing the boundaries of 3D digital heritage, ensuring that cultural institutions,
 researchers, and the public can beneﬁt from these advancements.



 For more information about the 3DBigDataSpace project, upcoming events, or collaboration
 opportunities, please contact the coordinator: Jun. Prof. Dr. Sander Münster
 (sander.muenster@timemachine.eu)




Project partners presenting their activities and work package involvement during the kick-off meeting.



                                                                         Photos by Richard Joos (CC-BY-SA)
About 3DBigDataSpace
3DBigDataSpace is a collaborative European project designed to enhance and expand the digital
cultural heritage landscape through the aggregation, storage, and enhancement of high-quality
3D content. Funded by the Digital Europe Programme, the project brings together a consortium
of leading cultural heritage organizations, research institutions, and tech companies to advance
the use of 3D data in XR applications and beyond.

3DBigDataSpace consortium
   •   Coordinator: Time Machine Organisation (TMO)
   •   Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena (Uni Jena)
   •   IN2 Digital Innovations GmbH (IN2)
   •   Stichting Europeana (EF)
   •   Inception SRL (Inception)
   •   Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK)
   •   Rooom AG (rooom AG)
   •   The HUNT Museum (HUNT)
   •   Poznan Supercomputing and Networking Centre (PSNC)
   •   University of Vigo (U.Vigo)

Project starting date: 1 February 2025
Project end date: 31 July 2026
Granting authority: European Health and Digital Executive Agency




Press Contact:

Mag. Kerstin Muff
Chief Communications Officer
Time Machine Organisation

kerstin.muff@timemachine.eu




                             This project is co-funded by the European Union. Views and opinions
                             expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily
                             reflect those of the European Union or the granting authority [Digital Europe
                             Programme (DIGITAL)]. Neither the European Union nor the granting
                             authority can be held responsible for them.

                             This project additionally receives funding from the Austrian Research
                             Promotion Agency (FFG).
