Workflows
                                                                                              5



Currently, digital reconstructions are mainly a process in one single context by interdis-
ciplinary workgroups using expert technologies. 3D reconstructions in the humanities are
primarily created within long-term interdisciplinary projects. This chapter provides an
overview of the team processes and workflows to create 3D reconstructions. Interdisci-
plinary teamwork creates specific challenges due to the different work processes of the
disciplines involved—e.g., humanities, design, and computing. Since 3D reconstructions
are projects, both processes and quality need to be managed. This chapter contains a set
of empirically grounded recommendations for the organization and management of 3D
reconstruction projects.



   Guiding questions
   • What are generic process models for 3D reconstruction projects?
   • What are typical project settings?
   • What are the recommendations for those projects?


   Basic terms
   • Interdisciplinarity
   • Project management


   As highlighted in the previous chapter, interdisciplinary collaboration is a key feature
of many 3D modeling projects in the humanities; this chapter highlights some key features
and strategies for cooperation.
© The Author(s) 2024                                                                    81
S. Münster et al., Handbook of Digital 3D Reconstruction of Historical Architecture,
Synthesis Lectures on Engineers, Technology, & Society 28,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-43363-4_5
82                                                                                5 Workflows



     Further reading: Research on Workflows
     In contrast to philosophical approaches, little empirical research exists on practices
     and users of digital 3D modeling in the humanities [1]. As an example, Huvila
     investigated user roles and practices in archaeology [2, 3] as well as certain practices
     within the ARKDIS project [4]. Another empirical perspective is the research on
     usability and requirements for software design for humanities researchers, which
     were investigated within the VERA project [5, 6].



5.1         The Process of 3D Reconstruction

The process of digital 3D reconstruction encompasses the creation of a virtual modelby
means of software tools, which is mostly done by specialized modelers, followed by visu-
alization, through which the model is rendered into a presentation format. This process is
usually closely accompanied by historical research through which a sound understanding
of the object to be modeled is developed on the basis of sources that provide information
from the past [7–9].


     Further reading: The 3D Digitization Process
     For 3D digitization, process, and workflow schemes [10–13] differ greatly by appli-
     cation scenario parameters, e.g., retrieval technology and heritage object parameters.
     Workflows involve two key aspects: documentation (data acquisition, e.g., of image or
     range data, and registration) and 3D modeling (computing into a 3D model, including
     point cloud generation, structuring and modeling, and texture mapping) [14, 15].
     Data Acquisition
     Data acquisition quality is influenced by several attributes [16, 17]:

     •   Resolution: size and granularity of the samples.
     •   Accuracy of the measure: variation from the original.
     •   Repeatability.
     •   Environmental sensitivity including robustness of the acquisition method under
         different climate conditions (e.g., light, wind, temperature).

     Framework conditions are set by acquisition time, portability of the equipment,
     flexibility (e.g., to retrieve at different conditions), and price [15]. Depending on
     attributes, framework conditions and purpose different technologies are used for 3D
     data acquistion (Figs. 5.1 and 5.2).
5.1 The Process of 3D Reconstruction                                                             83




  Fig. 5.1 Acquisition technologies used in projects relating to immovable objects [18, p. 30]




  Fig. 5.2 Acquisition technologies used in projects relating to immovable objects [18 p. 31]
84                                                                                5 Workflows



     Data Processing
     Data processing comprises a wide range of mostly algorithmic approaches to creat-
     ing a 3D model out of the acquired data. The aim of related workflows is to set up
     a multi-stage data processing pipeline, which varies by data type, quality, expected
     results, and object(recent examples for museum artifacts [19], monuments [20]).
     Pipeline design is influenced by objectives including levels of output quality, veloc-
     ity, reproducibility, flexibility, robustness, and automation [21, 22]. This contradicts
     with the huge variety of cultural heritage qualities [23, 24]. Recent achievements
     use data fusion [21] to improving model quality.


   In view of the resulting division of labor, it is essential to consider cooperation,
communication, and quality management. The entire working process of virtual 3D recon-
struction can roughly be divided into sources, modeling, and visualization (Fig. 3.1),
which may be made up of numerous steps and tasks and take on different forms (Fig. 5.3).


     Further reading: 3D Reconstruction Step-By-Step Tutorial
     This tutorial was recorded in 2020 as a video screencast and describes the 3D
     reconstruction of a historical townhouse from a cadastral plan and photography for
     the web. Tools and services used are the Overpass Service,1 QGIS,2 and Maxon
     Cinema 4D (Fig. 5.3).3




1 https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Overpass_API/Overpass_QL#out, accessed on 1.2.2023.
2 https://www.qgis.org, accessed on 1.2.2023.
3 https://www.maxon.net, accessed on 1.2.2023.
5.1 The Process of 3D Reconstruction                                                                               85


              Stage 1: Export of vectorized building footprints from Open Street Map (OSM) via the Overpass
              Exporter
              1                                                         Export vectorized building footprints
                                                                        from OSM via Overpass.




              2                                                         Mark a square on the map and the build-
                                                                        ing layer from OSM selected for export-
                                                                        ing.




              Stage 2: Georeferencing with QGIS: QGIS is an open GIS used to match the historical map and
              the building footprints.
              3                                                     Import the OSM base layer and the his-
                                                                    torical cadastral plan as raster layers. Se-
                                                                    lect corresponding points via the georef-
                                                                    erencing tool.




              4                                                         After defining corresponding 6–10
                                                                        points the transformed map is projected
                                                                        to the OSM base layer.




  Fig. 5.3 Example workflow: printout of a video tutorial for the 3D reconstruction of a histor-
  ical townhouse from a cadastral plan and photography for the web [25]
86                                                                                                         5 Workflows


             5                                                   Import the OSM building paths as vector
                                                                 layer.




             6                                                   Export the transformed cadaster map as
                                                                 png raster graphic, OSM building
                                                                 ground plot layer as kml markup file.




            Stage 3: 3D Modelling and texturing in Maxon Cinema 4D
            7                                                      Convert the kml layer to dxf file format
                                                                   via a web conversion service. Cinema
                                                                   4D cannot import kml files directly.




            8                                                        Import the converted layer as dxf in Cin-
                                                                     ema4D.




            9                                                        Import of raster graphics




     Fig. 5.3 (continued)
5.1 The Process of 3D Reconstruction                                               87


          10                           Scale layers to aligning both, vectorized
                                       ground plots and the historical raster
                                       graphics.




          11                           Draw outline of the building footprint as
                                       spline path by clicking outer points.




          12                           Extrude object via NURBS to create a
                                       volumetric geometry.




          13                           Convert object into a polygonal geome-
                                       try and insert a horizontal cut.




          14                           Select two upper opposite points each
                                       and set distance = 0 to center.




  Fig. 5.3 (continued)
88                                                                 5 Workflows


           15               Create a new empty material definition
                            and load image showing the front of the
                            building.




           16               Select facade polygons and apply mate-
                            rial to those polygons.




           17               Switch to “texturing mode” and select
                            texture to adjust.




           18               Align outer points of the texture coordi-
                            nates to the edges of the photo texture.




            19              Calculate texture as raster graphic.




     Fig. 5.3 (continued)
5.2     Interdisciplinarity                                                                       89


              20                                        Export as Collada file to upload into a
                                                        web viewer.




      Fig. 5.3 (continued)




5.2          Interdisciplinarity

Interdisciplinarity refers to a “confrontation of several disciplines with a [joint] topic or
issue” [26. p. 7]. Related to this, Schelsky speaks of a “partial scientific development
unit at the empirical object” [27, p. 72]. Interdisciplinary collaboration is characterized
by developing a joint terminology and methodology [28, 29]. Interdisciplinary insti-
tutionalization ranges from temporary collaborations to the creation of new “hybrid”
research disciplines [30, p. 16], such as the digital humanities as a combination of applied
computing fostering research in humanities.
    An important distinction, shown schematically in Fig. 5.4, relates to forms of disci-
plinary collaborations. Multidisciplinarity refers to independent research on a topic by
different disciplines. Transdisciplinarity names collaborative development and research
on a topic including scientific disciplines as well as other stakeholders, such as non-
governmental organizations or special interest groups. This concept is mainly associated
with a research on complex and highly social relevant issues such as environmental
protection or societal changes [32].




Fig. 5.4 Types of disciplinary cooperation [31, p. 7]
90                                                                                    5 Workflows


5.3       Modeling the Project Process

How does a 3D reconstruction project work? A general model of project processes
includes the four phases of project initiation, planning, implementation, and completion
[33, 34], and a parallel task of monitoring and control [35], each of which is characterized
by specific objectives and characteristics (Figs. 3.4 and 5.5).
   Interdisciplinary research projects do not follow a standardized project process, but
each has their own rhythm [26]. Accordingly, the phases named below, and the associ-
ated work tasks do not represent a linear sequence but rather components of a process
(Table 5.1).
   The entire workflow is sequenced into substeps using organizational modules such as
work tasks or work packages. Milestones are agreed as transition points between orga-
nizational elements, to create deadlines for work actions and to evaluate actual progress
compared to planning [38].




Fig. 5.5 Project life cycle [36, 310, p. 91]

Table. 5.1 Phases of interdisciplinary research [26, p. 29f., 37]
Phase                     Common goals and questions
Start                     Coordinating the project team (interests, positions, competencies)
                          Operationalizing the project goals
                          Drafting the cooperation structure
                          Assigning roles (moderation, work packages)
                          Developing a project plan, selecting dates for evaluation
                          Defining quality criteria
Implementation            Elaborating intermediate and partial steps (detailed planning)
Completion                Securing results and publication
                          Accounting for the cooperation
5.4     3D Reconstructions as Interdisciplinary Projects                                     91


   During intensive work phases in the run-up to “more selective events” (milestones,
presentations, reports, etc.) most of the project work is done [26, p. 30]. Tasks that are
not essential for achieving results, such as communication work, are neglected in these
intense phases. 3D reconstruction projects are Innovative and research-intensive and are
thus difficult to plan [39], so unplanned cuts—due to personnel changes or unexpected
difficulties—may come to light, creating the need to adjust objectives. A particularly
important aspect of academic projects is the sensible design of the overall duration of the
project. Newly constituted and interdisciplinary project teams need time to build the team
and set up the project [38].


5.4         3D Reconstructions as Interdisciplinary Projects

In digital reconstructions, information technologies serve to produce virtual historical
models. Computer science provides the tools, while archaeology and the history of cul-
ture, art and architecture, architectural research, and museum studies provide perspectives
on the content. Owing to the highly specialized nature of the tools, the model is usually
not created by the persons responsible for the content, but, in interdisciplinary projects,
by modelers who come from computer science, architecture, geosciences, engineering,
and design. The disciplines involved in the 3D reconstruction projects have very different
approaches [40]. This requires synchronization and is often the source of problems in
practice.


      Further reading: Generic Process Models of Disciplines Involved in 3D Recon-
      structions
      A computer science view of the visualization process
      From the point of view of computer science, 3D reconstruction is a visualization
      project. An associated procedure ideally includes the successive steps of data input
      and data selection, modeling and simulation, and output (Figs. 3.5 and 5.6).




      Fig. 5.6 Generic visualization process model [41]
92                                                                                5 Workflows



        Data: The starting point of a visualization is data. Schumann and Brodlie clas-
     sify data based on their origin: as empirically measured values from a real-world
     or a theoretical world such as mathematics, or as designed data such as artis-
     tic representations from an artificial world, e.g. textual sources or drawn images
     [42, 43].
        Data selection: In terms of process theory, in a historical 3D reconstruction data
     is selected from sources. Deduction is usually less of a problem than the extrap-
     olation of incomplete source data. In addition to data reduction as proposed by
     Schumann, the following aspects of data selection arise [42]:

     1. Removal of irrelevant data
     2. Dataset abstraction
     3. Indication of an area of interest
     4. Interpolation or extrapolation of missing data
     5. Compilation of the required data
     6. Selection of subsets.

        Modeling: A model is created using computer tools: the geometric shape is
     defined, virtual lighting and the material properties of the reference object simulated.
        Simulation: This step comprises the creation of a geometric model, a definition
     of texturing, i.e., the assignment of surface color and structure or animation.
        Output: The virtual 3D model is available as a digital dataset and as such is
     only indirectly accessible to both the editor and the viewer. To make it visible
     and editable, it must therefore be mapped and thus converted into static individual
     images or more complex mapping contexts such as animations or interactive display
     formats.
     The design process
     In the strict sense, design includes finding the form. In a 3D reconstruction, this
     process involves both architectural design—reconstructing a plan of the building
     structures [44],—and graphic design of visualizations (Fig. 5.7).
5.4     3D Reconstructions as Interdisciplinary Projects                                       93




      Fig. 5.7 Analysis-synthesis-evaluation model of the design

         More recent design theories understand the phases of analysis and synthesis as a
      unit and thus explain design in terms of a complex circle (Fig. 3.6), which borrows
      from hermeneutics and systems theory [45]. Reference is made to the principle of
      “analysis through synthesis” [46, 47, p. 6]. While the ideal technical process has a
      clear target or termination criteria, design difficulties are generally counted among
      the “wicked problems” for which no clear endpoint or solutions are possible [48,
      49, p. 7]. The process therefore does not end when a goal is achieved, but when the
      approach to the goal or external termination criteria is deemed sufficient (Fig. 5.8).




      Fig. 5.8 Hermeneutic model of historical science
94                                                                              5 Workflows



     The historical processes
     Similarly, to design processes, the historical research process has a cyclical struc-
     ture (Fig. 3.7). Since the mid-1950s historical research has become primarily
     problem-focused [50]. This research paradigm is strongly linked to the emergence
     of constructivist explanatory models, based on interpreting historical facts and
     reassessing historical sources. In a constructivist view, each “action […] is pre-
     ceded by intentions” [51, 52], whereby a source as a residue or tradition represents
     the intention of its historical creator. In their entirety, historical sources provide
     an incomplete and often contradictory picture of the past and thus an incomplete
     database for a 3D reconstruction. This insoluble dilemma ultimately led to the view
     that historical science is a limited construction [50], and as such cannot provide a
     reliable, holistic picture of the past. Hermeneutics represents the classic and most
     widespread investigation paradigm of historical sciences [53], where this qualitative
     method is understood as a cyclical interplay between the researcher’s prior under-
     standing and understanding of the sources. In terms of process, the latter is based
     on the former and, by examining sources using the methodical steps of formal “ex-
     ternal” and content-related “internal” source criticism, the researcher expands their
     (pre-)understanding.
     Since all three modes of work are combined in a 3D reconstruction project this
     can cause conflicts. A central mark of visualization processes is their decreasing
     flexibility over a time—with high costs in case of applying unplanned fundamental
     changes at late stage. Vice versa, hermeneutic processes are generating fundamental
     insights often late in a research process. Consequently, 3D modelling require balanc-
     ing between these different work modes and mitigation e.g. by defining parameters
     which are most likely to become subject of change at later stages.




5.5        3D Reconstruction Project Management

5.5.1      Definition of Project Work

3D reconstruction projects are a form of temporary work organization characterized by
systems of rules for coordinating the achievement of goals based on the division of labor
[38]. Projects according to DIN 69,901 represent tasks which are “essentially character-
ized by the uniqueness of the conditions in their entirety” [54]. Central features of this
form of work are task orientation, teamwork, a time limit, and transition [38, 55, 56]. All
aspects of controlling projects are conceptually covered by project management. While
the project as a phenomenon is at least as old as modernity, the term project management
only dates back to the 1970s [57]. In general, project management offers a number of
5.5   3D Reconstruction Project Management                                               95


comprehensive classification schemes and standards [35]. Economics, in particular, pro-
vides an almost unmanageable multitude of recommendations and “success factors” for
project management [39] as well as countless descriptions of inhibiting factors/ Kerzner
defines nine possible reasons for project failure [57]: (1) poor morale, (2) poor motiva-
tion, (3) poor human relations, (4) poor productivity, (5) no employee commitment, (6)
no functional commitment, (7) delays in problem solving, (8) too many unresolved pol-
icy issues, and (9) conflicting priorities between executives, line managers, and project
managers.
   Aspects of project management essential for theoretical consideration here include
organization, goals, planning, quality, and quality management, which are discussed in
the following sections.


5.5.2     Project Organization

From an economic perspective, digital 3D reconstruction projects are innovative because
they are knowledge- and research-intensive, mostly prototypical, and produce new results
and processes [39]. Historical 3D reconstruction projects are often cooperations between
academic institutions that are largely independent of one another. Accordingly, such
projects are usually organized as a “matrix” [39, 58]. A general feature of a matrix is
that employees involved in the project report to several superiors, both in the sending
organizational unit and the project coordinator. Such an organizational form has a high
success rate and generally high efficiency compared to other organizational models [39],
but requires a high level of coordination effort: the project manager’s great influence over
the superior of the sending institution is beneficial for project processing, though disci-
plinary powers, responsibility for task delegation, and control should be assigned to the
project manager.
   Academic projects are a particular form of matrix organization, since disciplinary pow-
ers, at least in the academic field, usually lie exclusively with the sending institution.
Projects may fail due to the high risk of competing priorities being set by managers of the
project and independent institutions involved [57]. According to Hausschild and Salomo
[39], another key factor in the success of innovation projects is the physical proximity
of participants. Hoegl and Proserpio [59] show that physical proximity not only increases
community building and the frequency and variety of information transfer between project
members, but also promotes their self-directed coordination; remarkably, spatial proximity
does not lead to an improvement in transactional knowledge.
96                                                                               5 Workflows


5.5.3     Goals

As innovation projects, 3D reconstruction projects are often a “process in which it is often
not at all clear which goal is to be achieved” [38, p. 18]. Such a lack of clarity of pur-
pose results from the high complexity of the task and the associated lack of clarity about
the problem structure and unpredictability of problem components [39]. Characteristics
of a lack of clear goal include “constant trying, approaching, very often connected with
repetition steps” until a result “is selected as useful” [38, p. 18]. From a conflict theory
perspective, lacking a clear objective potentially leads to conflicts with regard to the inter-
pretation of a work procedure [39]. In most cases, projects do not pursue a single goal,
but a whole series of goals. Such goals can not only have different qualities and priorities,
but sometimes also compete [39]—for 3D reconstructions e.g. academic quality vs. com-
pleteness vs. impressing results. Finally, different objectives or priorities are often linked
to individual or collective perspectives of the persons and institutions involved [39].


5.5.4     Planning and Control

An overarching and general model shows that project planning includes a trade-off
between the influencing variables of time, budget, and goals (Fig. 3.8). Limited resources
mean that “the ‘ideal’ solution cannot always be sought for scientific projects” [26, p. 33].
A major problem in the advance planning of innovation processes such as 3D reconstruc-
tion projects is the lack of knowledge about the quality of the achievable goal and the
path leading there. Information and knowledge deficits require an approximate approach,
which is based on a suitable sequencing and prioritization of work tasks.
   The question of organizational structures and tools for controlling results, which is
closely related to quality management, is closely linked to planning work steps. Dele-
gation and monitoring of tasks and staff is part of vertical organization [60]. Closely
related to this is what Kräkel calls the “dilemma of organizational theory” [60, p. 116]:
delegation of decision-making authority enables efficient problem solving but requires
comprehensive control and coordination to achieve a common overall goal (Fig. 5.9).


Fig. 5.9 Planning parameters
of project management [38,
p. 116]
5.5     3D Reconstruction Project Management                                               97


   There is a broad consensus that, the project manager is of outstanding importance
to the success of any project. Other factors are budgets that can be managed flexibly;
intensive, informal, and formalized communication; suitable sequencing and monitoring
of progress [39]. Hauschildt and Salomo propose a three-step procedure for monitoring
project processes [39, p. 505]:

• Ongoing determination of deviations
• Review to determine the cause
• Evaluation of deviations and, if necessary, corrections.

Who does this monitoring, and at what stages, is discussed next in a theoretical consider-
ation of quality management. Another issue is how the people involved in such work are
organized. In 3D reconstruction, this includes the organizational structures and forms of
cooperation relevant to both the project and the scientific institution or community.


5.5.5       Quality

Quality is the “degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulfill requirements” [35,
p. 180]. Such requirements include, both the outcomes, i.e., result quality and compliance
with framework conditions on the way to achieving a goal, i.e., process quality. Another
important distinction is between quality, which refers to errors and inconsistencies, and
grade, which indicates the scope or quality level of a result. Theoretical concepts of
quality are presented here with two aims: to consider quality in the work process, one
needs to consider approaches to quality management.


      Further reading: Recommendations for interdisciplinary 3D reconstruction
      projects [61]

      Workflow
      1. run pre-projects to test cooperation, approaches, and support competence devel-
         opment
      2. align the project early on with budgets and requirements of funding providers
      3. consider the time needed for interpretation and corrections
      4. set deadlines promote efficient work
      5. make deadlines binding and include incentives or sanctions
      Sources
      6. finalize collection and analysis of sources best as possible before starting
         reconstruction
98                                                                            5 Workflows



     7. if source findings are unclear, make a first draft model to support decision-
        making
     8. decide iteratively in case of unclear findings
     9. set editorial deadlines for the inclusion of further sources
     Modeling
     10. consider easy editing of the model
     11. develop, document, and adhere to the model system and structure
     12. structure the model based on spatial, temporal, functional, and model organiza-
         tional aspects (→3D Modeling)
     13. sort and locate existing source information in space and time, e.g., in plans
     Quality management
     14. synchronize the quality expectations of all stakeholders at an early stage and
         recheck frequently
     15. in case of multiple sources, define a primary modeling source
     16. present omissions or several alternative hypotheses in the model if the findings
         are unclear
     17. develop quality standards, e.g. on detailing, early and maintain them as far as
         possible
     18. develop a strategy for the frequency and timing of corrections
     19. make visual comparisons, e.g., of model views and sources
     20. to support a visual assessment
     Project management
     21. subordinate management and coordination tasks in terms of time and personnel
     22. allocate tasks and fill positions depending on needed and existing competencies
     23. promote intrinsic motivation through “healthy” competition, public perception,
         and group motivation
     Technology
     24. allow individual software decisions in case of prior knowledge
     25. use widely established exchange formats that are accessible to all stakeholders
     Learning
     26. in interdisciplinary projects, only teach competencies relevant to the coopera-
         tion, i.e., interface knowledge
     Sustainability
     27. involve participants in opening project processes
     28. assign minute takers and create minutes of meetings
     Communication
     29. communicate too much rather than too little
5.5     3D Reconstruction Project Management                                               99



      30. actively communicate and broadly base decisions
      31. keep stakeholders regularly informed
      32. describe complex problems in several ways when communicating at a distance
      33. draw up structured problem lists and communicate them in advance of a
          meeting
      34. use simple language and intuitive formats such as pictures
      35. ensure understanding e.g., by asking/repeating
      36. use pictures and language as a combined medium of communication
      37. use sketches and drawings as aids
      38. draw or write comments directly in model visualizations
      Presentation of Results
      39. present sources and procedures appropriately in the presentation medium
      40. carry out usability testing to determine the suitability for the target group




5.5.6       Quality Management

Quality management within a project includes all activities so that a project satisfies
the requirements [35]. This includes the aspects of quality planning, its practical appli-
cation and control. Quality management is thus closely linked to project planning and
management. Schmidt identifies comparisons with other projects, points in a project, nor-
mative standards and quality models as essential procedures or “reference models” of
quality management specifically in academic contexts [62, p. 11ff.]. Especially regarding
reference models, it is essential to make the individual quality ideas of all relevant stake-
holders transparent and to develop a common idea in this regard [35]. Likewise, quality
management includes establishing tools for quality control, which can be done internally
or externally and periodically or continuously. One merit of continuous internal quality
assurance is that project teams have a high degree of social control. A monitoring group
integrated into the project structure but outside the actual project work, or filling the role
of a quality officer [35], whose tasks include checking compliance with goals or iden-
tifying defaults. Alternatively, external quality control can be done by people who are
completely outside the project structure, such as supervisors from the institutions involved
[39]. In contrast, quality audits are instruments of periodic quality control [62]. In these
cases, objectives are used to monitor the status of the work and identify the need for
action. Such audits as work meetings or group reviews, can be carried out both internally
and by external expert commissions [35, 39]. While primarily aimed at quality assurance
in the specific work context, quality circles [58] aim to sensitize employees and thus
create a generic awareness of quality.
100                                                                           5 Workflows


5.6      Phenomena and Strategies for Cooperation


  Further reading: Example strategies
  • Competence development through preliminary projects: The most important
    characteristics for adequate planning, adjustment, and control are the expertise
    and experience of the project planner [39]. While only rarely discussed in the
    literature in this context, it is essential for a subsequent empirical consideration
    to reduce the complexity of a problem, acquire skills, and test organizational
    structures through prototypical pilot projects.
  • Project sequencing: Irrespective of any previous experience, a project plan is
    usually broken down into organizational units such as work packages and sub-
    tasks that are limited in terms of time and resource availability. Ideally, these are
    provided with a defined target level and endpoint, or milestone, enabling devi-
    ations from planning to be determined comparatively quickly and the project
    schedule to be adjusted [38, 39]. 3D reconstruction projects also involve a large
    number of previously unplanned incisions and changes [61], due to their inno-
    vative character and unpredictability, but also to organizational changes such as
    personnel reshuffles, which creates the need for permanent project control and
    the adjustment of plans in relation to these changes.
  • Priority lists: Because innovation and research projects do not usually have a
    foreseeable target, an order of priorities essential instrument for planning. An
    important element here is weighing up decision alternatives, to identify and
    define the most important subgoals that need to be prioritized [39].


   As proven empirically [63], many challenges for 3D reconstruction projects are con-
nected to a lack of interdisciplinary understanding. Due to the high complexity and
team-based workflows, aspects, and usage practices for communication, cooperation,
and quality management are highly relevant within 3D reconstruction projects. Intensive
support by images during a reconstruction process could foster interdisciplinary commu-
nication, and could be used as “creoles” [64] to exchange and share mental models. For
that, it is necessary to synchronize terminologies or to employ common grounds like sym-
bols, colors, or tags [7]. Especially if people with different disciplinary backgrounds are
involved, visual media fosters communication and quality negotiations, e.g., by comparing
source images and renderings of the created virtual reconstruction. Furthermore, several
projects successfully adopted highly standardized conventions from architectural draw-
ings for interdisciplinary exchange. Such decisions and tasks should be started at an early
project stage and should be controlled and adapted throughout the entire process. Ideally,
such visual coding schemes would be a mental model shared by all members of the project
team and would be documented and based on either extant coding schemes, e.g., from
5.6     Phenomena and Strategies for Cooperation                                           101


engineering, or would use natural coding like physical analogies or concrete depictions
[65] to make these issues recognizable and even accessible later. In all cases, images
would only support communication and, especially for complex tasks and interdisci-
plinary exchange, personal contact would be more useful than communicating information
over long distances. Resulting challenges include access to and evaluation of models and
images to make authorship transparent, as well as references between reconstruction and
(explainable) fundamental knowledge such as sources. A specific challenge is the division
of the labor that is usually involved in the project. It is evident from published project
reports that interpretative 3D reconstruction projects are almost always interdisciplinary
in nature, with the teams mostly only coming together temporarily, unlike the situation in
companies or institutions [38]. The tasks are usually divided between historical research
and creation of the model. Consequently, aspects such as the organization of work, the
distribution of tasks, cooperation, and communication, are important [61].


      Summary
      3D reconstructions are carried out within interdisciplinary innovation projects,
      which comprise challenges such as open-ended workflows and the need to syn-
      chronize different terminology and work processes. With regards to the latter, a big
      challenge is raised by the different stepping in humanities, computing, and design.
      Since humanities research refines with the analysis and contextualization of further
      sources, the technical view of 3D reconstruction seeks a clear problem definition,
      where fundamental changes at a late stage—common in humanities—cause a huge
      workload for changing a 3D model.
      Concepts

      • Interdisciplinarity: 3D reconstructions in the humanities are primarily created
        within long-term interdisciplinary projects. Intensive support by images during a
        reconstruction process could foster interdisciplinary communication, and could
        be used as “creoles” [64] to exchange and share mental models. To do this, it
        is necessary to synchronize terminologies or to employ common grounds like
        symbols, colors, or tags [7].
      • Project management: In academic interdisciplinary cooperation, efficient strate-
        gies and routines of self-organization often fail to develop. Differing interests
        and quality expectations as well as weak incentives to finish projects efficiently
        often cause severe and long-lasting friction, delays, budget overruns, and conflicts
        between stakeholders. Moreover, team members are mostly matrix organized—
        in both teams and institutional structures—and multiple tasks are assigned. Even
        if leaders of academic projects widely influence the setting of general objec-
        tives, they have few instruments to motivate or penalize employees and to assign
102                                                                                  5 Workflows



      individual time capacities. As a paradoxon, academic projects are often infinite,
      where missed deadlines and exceeded budgets are often compensated by other
      resources and which prioritize “perfect” quality above fit to resources.

   Key literature

   • Project Management Institute. A Guide to the Project Management Body of
     Knowledge. PMBOK Guide; PMI: Newtown Square, 2004 [35].
   • Hauschildt, J.; Salomo, S. Innovationsmanagement; Vahlen: München, 2007 [39].




References

 1. Huvila I (2014) Archives, libraries and museums in the contemporary society: perspectives of
    the professionals. In: iConference 2014 Proceedings. Berlin, pp45–64
 2. Huvila I (2010) To whom it may concern? The users and uses of digital archaeological infor-
    mation
 3. Huvila I (2006) The ecology of information work – a case study of bridging archaeological work
    and virtual reality based knowledge organisation
 4. ARKDIS - Archaeological information in the digital society. http://www.abm.uu.se/research/
    Ongoing+Research+Projects/ARKDIS/. Accessed 9 May 2014
 5. Warwick C (2012) Studying users in digital humanities. In: Warwick C et al (eds) Digital
    humanities in practice. Facet Publishing, London, pp 1–21
 6. Fisher CR et al (2009) Integrating new technologies into established systems: a case study from
    Roman Silchester. Computer applications to archaeology 2009 Williamsburg, Virginia, USA,
    22–26 March 2009
 7. Münster S (2013) Workflows and the role of images for a virtual 3D reconstruction of no
    longer extant historic objects. In: ISPRS annals II-5/W1 (XXIV international CIPA sympo-
    sium), pp197–202
 8. Münster S et al (2017) Von Plan-und Bildquellen zum virtuellen Gebäudemodell. Zur Bedeu-
    tung der Bildlichkeit für die digitale 3D-Rekonstruktion historischer Architektur. In: Ammon S
    et al (eds) Bildlichkeit im Zeitalter der Modellierung. Operative Artefakte in Entwurfsprozessen
    der Architektur und des Ingenieurwesens. eikones. Wilhelm Fink Verlag, München, pp 255–286
 9. Bakaoukas AG (2020) Virtual reality reconstruction applications standards for maps, artefacts,
    archaeological sites and monuments. In: Liarokapis F et al (eds) Visual computing for cultural
    heritage. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 161–176
10. Amico N et al (2021) Ontological entities for planning and describing cultural heritage 3D
    models creation. ACM J Comput Cult Herit (JOCCH)
11. Letellier R et al (2007) Recording, documentation, and information management for the con-
    servation of heritage places. Guiding principles
12. Boardman C et al (2018) 3D Laser scanning for heritage. Advice and guidance on the use of
    laser scanning in archaeology and architecture
References                                                                                      103


13. European Commission (2011) Commission recommendation of 27.10.2011 on the digitisation
    and online accessibility of cultural material and digital preservation
14. Gomes L et al (2014) 3D reconstruction methods for digital preservation of cultural heritage: a
    survey. Pattern Recogn Lett 50:3–14
15. Remondino F et al (2010) Reality-based 3D documentation of natural and cultural heritage
    sites—techniques, problems, and examples. Appl Geomat 2(3):85–100
16. Weber M (1988) Die ‘Objektivität’ sozialwissenschaftlicher und sozialpolitischer Erkenntnis.
    In: Winckelmann J (ed) Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Wissenschaftslehre. Tübingen
17. Claisse C et al (2017) Containers of Stories: using co-design and digital augmentation to
    empower the museum community and create novel experiences of heritage at a house museum.
    Des J 20(sup1):S2906–S2918
18. Ioannides M et al (2020) Study on quality in 3D digitisation of tangible cultural heritage: map-
    ping parameters, formats, standards, benchmarks, methodologies, and guidelines. VIGIE 2020/
    654 Final Study Report
19. Medina JJ et al (2020) A rapid and cost-effective pipeline for digitization of museum specimens
    with 3D photogrammetry. PLoS ONE 15(8):e0236417
20. Pepe M et al (2020) An efficient pipeline to obtain 3D model for HBIM and structural analysis
    purposes from 3D point clouds. Appl Sci-Basel 10(4):1235
21. Pamart A et al (2020) A robust and versatile pipeline for automatic photogrammetric-based
    registration of multimodal cultural heritage documentation. Remote Sens 12(12):2051
22. Stathopoulou EK et al (2019) Open-source image-based 3d reconstruction pipelines: review,
    comparison and evaluation. Int Arch Photogram Remote Sens Spat Inf Sci XLII-2/W17:331–
    338.
23. Ramos MM et al (2015) Data fusion in cultural heritage – a review. Int Arch Photogram Remote
    Sens Spat Inf Sci XL-5/W7:359–363.
24. Remondino F et al (2017) A critical review of automated photogrammetric processing of large
    datasets. Int Arch Photogram Remote Sens Spat Inf Sci XLII-2/W5:591–599
25. Münster S (2020) 3D reconstruction for the web with QGIS and Maxon Cinema 4D (Videotu-
    torial)
26. Schophaus M et al (2003) Von Brücken und Einbahnstraßen. Aufgaben für das Kooperations-
    management interdisziplinärer Forschung (Discussion paper Nr. 08/03)
27. Schelsky H (1966) Das Zentrum für interdisziplinäre Forschung. In: Mikat P et al (eds)
    Grundzüge einer neuen Universität. Bertelsmann, Gütersloh, pp 71–87
28. Gibbons M (1994) The new production of knowledge. The dynamics of science and research in
    contemporary societies
29. Münster S et al (2014) Common grounds and representations in cross-disciplinary processes.
    In: Carlucci D et al (eds) Knowledge and management models for sustainable growth. Institute
    of Knowledge Asset Management, Basilicata, pp 579–589
30. Klein JT (2000) A conceptual vocabulary of interdisciplinary science. In: Weingart P et al (eds)
    Practising interdisciplinarity. University of Toronto Press, Toronto, pp 3–24
31. OGC (2012) OGC City Geography Markup Language (CityGML) Encoding Standard, Version
    2.0.0
32. Defila R et al (1999) Projektbericht. Panorama Sondernummer: Transdisziplinarität evaluieren –
    aber wie?:5–11
33. Meredith JR et al (2000) Project management. A managerial approach, fourth edn.
34. Havila V et al (2013) Project-ending competence in premature project closures. Int J Project
    Manage 31(1):90–99
104                                                                                  5 Workflows


35. Project Management Institute (2004) A guide to the project management body of knowledge.
    PMBOK Guide
36. Vargas-Quesada B et al (2007) Visualizing the structure of science
37. Loibl MC et al (2001) Fragen zur Steuerung inter- und transdisziplinärer Forschung nach Auf-
    gabenpaketen und Projektphasen. http://www.ecology.at/projekt/detail/IuT/html/Steuerseiten/
    quellenmain.htm. Accessed besucht am on 10.1.2014
38. Nausner P (2006) Projektmanagement. die Entwicklung und Produktion des Neuen in Form von
    Projekten
39. Hauschildt J et al (2016) Innovations management. 6th edn. Vahlen, München.
40. Hou H et al (2007) The structure of scientific collaboration networks in scientometrics. Scien-
    tometrics 75(2):189–202
41. Haber RB et al (1990) Visualization idioms. A conceptual model for scientific visualization sys-
    tems. In: Shriver BD et al (eds) Scientific visualization. IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos,
    pp 149–177
42. Schumann H et al (2000) Visualisierung. Grundlagen und allgemeine Methoden
43. Brodlie KW (1992) Scientific visualization. Techniques and applications; with 15 tables
44. Steinmann F (1997) Modellbildung und computergestütztes Modellieren in frühen Phasen des
    architektonischen Entwurfs (Dissertation).
45. Loh Uv (2005) Designprozesse als Kommunikation antizipativer Prozesse
46. Gedenryd H (1998) How designers work. Making sense of authentic cognitive activity
47. Jonas W (2004) Designforschung als Argument
48. Roberts NC (2000) Wicked Problems and Network Approaches to Resolution. Visual Argum –
    Tools Collab Educ Sense-Mak 1(1):1–19
49. Castorph M (2008) Bauteilorientierte Entwurfsprozesse, Architekturlehre, BOE, Sammlung
    2002–2008
50. Wengenroth U (1998) Was ist Technikgeschichte?
51. Goering DT (2013) D. Timothy Goering über Gerber, Doris. Analytische Metaphysik der
    Geschichte. Handlungen, Geschichten und ihre Erklärung. H-Soz-u-Kult 08.01.2013:o. Angabe
52. Gerber D (2012) Analytische Metaphysik der Geschichte. Handlungen, Geschichten und ihre
    Erklärung
53. Goetz H-W (1993) Proseminar Geschichte. Mittelalter, vol 1719
54. DIN Deutsches Institut für Normung e. V (2009) DIN 69901–5 Projektmanagement – Projekt-
    managementsysteme – Teil 5. Begriffe
55. Pilbeam C (2013) Coordinating temporary organizations in international development through
    social and temporal embeddedness. Int J Project Manage 31(2):190–199
56. Lundin RA et al (1995) A theory of the temporary organization. Scand J Manag 11(4):437–455
57. Kerzner H (2003) Project management. A systems approach to planning, scheduling, and con-
    trolling, 8th edn.
58. von Rosenstiel L et al (2005) Grundriss der Psychologie. Organisationspsychologie, 9th edn
59. Hoegl M et al (2004) Team member proximity and teamwork in innovative projects. Acad
    Manag Proc 1:A1–A6
60. Kräkel M (2012) Organisation und Management
61. Münster S (2016) Interdisziplinäre Kooperation bei der Erstellung geschichtswissenschaftlicher
    3D-Rekonstruktionen
62. Schmidt U (2010) Wie wird Qualität definiert? In: Winde M (ed) Von der Qualitätsmessung zum
    Qualitätsmanagement. Praxisbeispiele an Hochschulen. Edition Stifterverband, Essen, pp 10–17
References                                                                                        105


63. Münster S et al (2015) 3D modeling technologies as tools for the reconstruction and visualiza-
    tion of historic items in humanities. A literature-based survey. In: Traviglia A (ed) Across space
    and time. papers from the 41st conference on computer applications and quantitative methods in
    archaeology, Perth, 25–28 March 2013. Amsterdam University Press, Amsterdam, pp 430–441
64. Styhre A (2010) Disciplining professional vision in architectural work. Learn Organ 17(5):437–
    454
65. Tversky B (2002) Spatial schemas in depictions. In: Gattis M (ed) Spatial schemas and abstract
    thought. MIT Press, Cambridge, pp 79–112




Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropri-
ate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license
and indicate if changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statu-
tory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder.
