3D Modeling
                                                                                              6



   Abstract

   The chapter introduces the concepts of the raw model and informative model; it
   clarifies the concept of semantic segmentation and defines the digital representation
   methods and 3D modeling techniques; finally, it lists the different configuration spaces
   of a 3D model in different software packages.




   Guiding questions
   • What are the methods of digital representation?
   • What are the 3D modeling techniques?
   • What are the differences between representation methods and 3D modeling tech-
     niques?


   Basic terms
   • Raw Model (acquisition/digitization)
   • Informative Model (information enriched reconstruction)
   • Discrete and Continuous modeling
   • Semantic segmentation
   • Mesh
   • Non-Uniform Rational B-Spline (NURBS)
   • Tessellation (discretization)
   • Level of Detail (LoD)



© The Author(s) 2024                                                                   107
S. Münster et al., Handbook of Digital 3D Reconstruction of Historical Architecture,
Synthesis Lectures on Engineers, Technology, & Society 28,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-43363-4_6
108                                                                        6 3D Modeling


6.1      The Raw Model and the Informative Model

Retro-digitization is the process of conversion into the digital format of a work designed
and published in an earlier era. There are several approaches for converting a real object
into digital form; sometimes, the raw data captured from reality has to be interpreted and
manipulated to produce a critical digital version of the object. At other times the object
is no longer extant or was never realized and the 3D information must be extracted from
documental sources, critically analyzed, and used as a starting point to reconstruct the
3D model [1].
   According to this premise, two main models within retro-digitization can be defined
in this context: the digitization, or Raw Model, and the reconstruction, or Informative
Model. This classification is proposed for the first time in this book, and it is aimed to
emphasize their different natures. The Raw Model (RM) is the unprocessed digital survey
of real sources (e.g., the point cloud/textured mesh resultant from the laser scanning of
the remains of a Roman theatre). The Informative Model (IM) is the critical rationalized
hypothetical virtual reconstruction.
   The RM is based on data that can now be obtained almost automatically using the
tested digital methodologies of architectural survey. Raw means unprocessed, thus this
model is based on the captured original data and it is not equivalent to the ultimate result
of an architectural survey which is usually interpreted and processed by the operator (e.g.,
the points that are coplanar or colinear in a point cloud are approximated with a plane
or a line [2]). The RM is data obtained with automated procedures. The precision and
accuracy of this data are linked to the correctness of the survey procedures adopted and
the tools used.
   The two most used techniques to generate a RM are digital photogrammetry and
digital scanning. Both produce a 3D point cloud that can be automatically (or semi-
automatically) transformed into a textured polygonal 3D model. Digital photogrammetry
calculates 3D information of the displayed objects from photographs taken at different
angles and returns 3D models of remarkable graphic quality that embed information even
on the material surface of the artifact. The technique is based on capturing and processing
photographs; therefore, it is relatively inexpensive because the tools needed are a cam-
era and a computer to run the processing program, which is less expensive than a laser
scanner. There are several applications on the market and the cost is easily managed by
any architectural firm or university research department. Digital scanning uses laser scan-
ners which gathers information about the geometry of objects by sending a laser beam
at different angles and measuring the distance between the laser emitter and the object’s
surface by the beam’s time of flight. The cost and quality of the scans are related to the
type of scanner used. These tools are considerably more costly than photogrammetry but
return metrically very accurate data. Today when it is economical and practical, these two
techniques are used together. Those techniques are described in the literature [3–6].
   The IM is built from a series of inferences based on reference data. This concept,
therefore, can be compared to what is known as reverse engineering. This process starts
from a reference in its final form with missing data and tries to deduce what was the
6.2     Semantic Description of the 3D Model                                               109


process that generated it. The RM lacks any semantic segmentation and organization and
can be used as a source to build the IM. Several studies are attempting to automate the
creation of a semantically structured IM starting from the RM data, e.g. by identfying
architectural segments from point clouds by using AI [7]. To date, these studies have not
produced satisfactory results, at least for application to architectural cultural heritage. The
current algorithms are not capable of identifying with sufficient efficiency the complexity
and the variety of architectural typologies. Will it be possible to automate this step in
the future? This question cannot be answered now, but the complexity of virtual recon-
structions is similar to the complexity of any creative act; therefore, it requires a certain
amount of creative and analogical intelligence which is typical of the complexity of the
human mind.


      Further reading: Research on modeling The research on technologies for 3D mod-
      eling and 3D digitization has been important for decades. In recent decades, various
      large-scale projects on the EU level on 3D modeling in cultural heritage primarily
      focused on 3D digitization from contemporary survey data [8]. A major objective
      during the FP7 to Horizon 2020 framework programs was to ease use, reduce costs,
      and increase quality. With the following transition to the Horizon Europe framework,
      valorization, and wide use became the focus. As recent projects on the EU level, the
      VIGIE study [9] examines use cases for 3D/4D digitization of tangible heritage and
      the EU DT–20 competence center [10] investigates and develops support structures
      for 3D digitization from contemporary survey data. Various articles were published
      to provide an overview of particular technologies of relevance for 3D modeling and
      visualization, recently on laser scanning [11], photogrammetry [12], machine learning
      [13, 14], and extended reality technologies [15].




6.2         Semantic Description of the 3D Model

Semantic segmentation/organization of data is the act of logically subdividing and struc-
turing information by making groups and naming each element according to similarities
(shape, type, position, etc.). It is rooted in the scientific organization and systematiza-
tion of knowledge, or taxonomy, which means a scheme of (hierarchical) classification in
which things are organized into groups or types, uniquely named and identified. It allows
for knowledge to be indexed and organized (e.g., a search engine taxonomy), so users can
more easily find the information they are searching for (Fig. 6.1).
   The semantic segmentation/organization of data is not only a matter of digital rep-
resentation; it rather intrinsically belongs to architecture [16]. This structure must be
linked to the language and type of architecture and must be as simple as possible. It is,
110                                                                          6 3D Modeling




Fig. 6.1 Semantic segmentation of a 3D photogrammetric model (Image: Foschi)


therefore, important to build the Informative Model by individually modeling its archi-
tectural elements and keeping them well organized. The parts should be named clearly
and unequivocally and grouped hierarchically [17, 18]. A building could be semantically
segmented into its elements as follows: the roof, the attic, the base, the window, the
door, the column, the wall, etc. Each element could be differentiated from the others
by adding to its name an indication of the positioning or numbering it in the group of
analogous elements. This first semantic structure is extremely important because it allows
anyone to clearly name each part of the analyzed architecture and refer to it unequivocally.
Only through clear and rational identification of these architectural elements it is possible
to appropriately decoding the model. Building a 3D model by assembling single ele-
ments also simplifies and rationalizes the process of 3D modeling: it allows copy-pasting
instances of parts that are equal/analogous, speeding up the modeling and analysis pro-
cess, and decreasing the file size. Semantic reading, therefore, has its digital equivalent
in the structure of 3D models like in any CAD and BIM software. This simple 3D model
structure can be refined and hierarchically organized at a later stage. This second level
of the semantic organization of the model can follow various paths, which are generally
also linked to the purpose of virtual reconstruction. For example, in an antique building,
the architectural elements could be organized according to the architectural order. We
could create a column level, and below this column level, insert the elements of the shaft,
the base, and the capital. Or we could divide and organize the elements according to the
floors of the building, etc. Of course, these choices are linked to the architectural typology
analyzed and the semantic choices must rationally reflect this important relationship.
6.2     Semantic Description of the 3D Model                                               111



      Further reading: Algorithmic modeling and machine learning
      • Algorithmic modeling: Traditional algorithmic-only approaches, as in pho-
        togrammetry, employ algorithms to complete a specific operation, e.g., to detect,
        describe, and match geometric features in images [19]. In contrast, machine
        learning uses algorithmic approaches to train a statistical model in a super-
        vised or unsupervised way via training data—e.g., to detect features [20]. Current
        evolvements in computer vision are closely coupled to the massive renaissance
        in machine learning [21] with the use of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
        [22] since 2012. Machine learning approaches are currently heavily researched
        and used for image and 3D point cloud analytics in cultural heritage [13], but
        also increasingly for 3D modeling tasks.
      • 3D/4D model generation via machine learning: In 3D reconstruction of cultural
        heritage, machine learning-based technologies are primarily used for specific
        tasks within the modeling process: to preselect imagery [23, 24], in seman-
        tic segmentation to classify parts of images [25–27], and to recognize specific
        objects.[27–30] Another strand—bypassing the modeling stage—is generating
        visualizations directly from imagery [28, 31, 32]. Machine-learning-based tech-
        nologies currently require large-scale training data [13, 27, 28] only capable of
        recognizing well-documented and visually distinctive landmark buildings [33].
        Machine learning fails to deal with less distinctive architecture, such as houses
        of similar style. Regarding transparency, most machine learning approaches are
        applied within black box settings in a non-standardized way [13, 34]. Specif-
        ically, generative adversarial networks (GAN) as a combination of proposal
        and assessment components of machine learning are frequently employed in
        3D modeling. Application scenarios are single photo digitization [35], comple-
        tion of incomplete 3D digitized models [36, 37], or photo-based reconstructions
        [38]. Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF), which use viewpoint cuing [39], have
        gained importance since 2020. Although primarily an image transformation-
        based approach to calculate new viewpoints, NeRF enables, e.g., lighting changes
        [40] or 3D mesh calculation from sparse imagery.


The semantic construction of the 3D model is linked to the knowledge of architecture;
not only its history but also all those qualities that define it: type, geometry, shape, archi-
tectural orders, etc. Therefore, the culture of the creator of the 3D model is an important
aspect. A scholar reconstructing a Renaissance building will have to study the design
of the architectural orders and the history of Renaissance architecture. The quality of a
virtual reconstruction depends primarily on the scholar’s discipline culture and experi-
ence. For this reason, a multidisciplinary approach from different expertise is desirable:
architects, historians, engineers, archaeologists, etc.
112                                                                       6 3D Modeling


6.3      Traditional and Digital Representation Methods

Digital representation has somehow closed a cycle between the real physical model and its
representation. From a 2D drawing, it is possible to construct a digital 3D model; this 3D
model can be printed into a physical model (→ Media and Interfaces); this physical model
or maquette can be scanned and transformed into a digital point cloud; this point cloud
can be transformed into a mesh model; the process can go on and the cycle repeats itself.
Therefore, digital representation has not only increased the accuracy of the drawings but
has also allowed transformations between the real physical model and its representation
in a more fluid and versatile way.
   Despite its importance, while there are shared standards and norms for traditional 2D
drawings (plans and elevations), for the construction and evaluation of digital 3D models
these norms have not yet been fully defined.
   Scholars that use 3D models as tools hardly ever make explicit reference to the methods
of representation and techniques they adopted to build them. Nevertheless, it would be
advisable for scientists and researchers to always declare the techniques and methods
used, to enhance transparency and interoperability of the 3D models (→ Documentation).
This is also an important prerequisite for the scientifical reuse of 3D models, made by
others, as a source of knowledge. In the next few paragraphs, the representation methods
and 3D modeling techniques are defined and illustrated.
   The methods of digital representation concern the intrinsic mathematical/geometrical
nature of the 3D models and are either continuous or discrete (Fig. 5.5):

• Continuous methods: the geometry is described in a continuous way with mathe-
  matical equations, the Mathematical /Surface Modelling is part of this category (e.g.,
  Non-Uniform Rational B-Spline (NURBS) modeling)
• Discrete methods: the geometry is described in a discrete way, not with equa-
  tions, but with points described by coordinates (vertices), lines (edges), and planar
  faces (polygons); numerical/polygonal modeling is part of this category (e.g., mesh
  modeling).

All the other methods mostly used in the architectural world can be considered subsets of
one of these two. For example, point cloud modeling is a subset of mesh modeling, and
spline and Bezier modeling are subsets of NURBS modeling (Fig. 6.2).
   Parametric modeling, handmade modeling, digital sculpting, etc. are not methods of
digital representation, they are 3D modeling techniques (→ 6.4 3D Modeling Techniques)
to create models of continuous or discrete nature.
   Continuous and discrete modeling have analogies with the traditional methods of
representation. Some scholars [41] propose to consider them as a direct addition to the
traditional representation methods which are:
6.3 Traditional and Digital Representation Methods                                           113




Fig. 6.2 Continuous (NURBS, on the left) and discrete (mesh) 3D models with different tesselation
(Image: Foschi)


•   Double orthogonal projection
•   Axonometric projection
•   Perspective projection
•   Topographic terrain projection (with contour lines).

Choosing between the discrete or continuous method has similar implications as choosing
to use an axonometry or a perspective. What is this method useful for? Why is it more
useful than the other/s? What aspects are you highlighting by choosing it? Even if the
final appearance of an object represented with one method or the other might be similar
(or even the same), the implications of using one or the other methods are different, due
to the scope and the data that the method carries.
   For example, if we represent the front view of the same cube in double, axonometric,
and perspective projections, the resulting image is the same, a square. Yet, the construc-
tions that generated those results are different, and so are the purposes that lead us to
choose one method over the other. We use double orthogonal projections to study and
check the measurements and proportions of the object; we use axonometric projection
to represent the relationship between volumes or the mechanism of the object; we use
perspective projection to mimic how the object is perceived by human eyes. Axonometric
and double projections are widely used in mechanical drawings and executive architectural
drawings, while perspective projection is widely used in painting and architectural render-
ings. Similarly, we use the digital methods of mathematical representation (NURBS)
to describe the form accurately and continuously. Instead, we use the polygonal method
(mesh) to build organic shapes or produce renderings.
   3D models can also be generated with hybrid methods, i.e., a model can be formed
from mathematical solids and mesh solids. This also happens in traditional representa-
tion methods: for example, a perspective section includes both the section in true form,
114                                                                            6 3D Modeling


as in double orthogonal projections, and the perspective view to formally evaluate the
space (Fig. 6.3). Mastering all representation methods (both digital and traditional) is
important because each of them has a specific vocation and is more effective than another
only in some contexts.
    To sum up, the methods of digital representation can be classified into two distinct
families: continuous and discrete. Continuous methods describe the shape continuously
and accurately through mathematical equations; the NURBS mathematical representation
is the most popular today. Discrete methods describe the shapes in an approximate and
discrete way through a list of vertices, described through their coordinates, and a list of
edges/faces that connect them; mesh polygonal modelling is the most popular today. The
point cloud is a subset of the numerical representation in which the shape is described
solely by a list of points in space (Fig. 6.4).
    To give a clarifying example, imagine modeling a sphere. With the continuous method,
the sphere will consist of a mathematical equation that describes the surface continuously
and accurately. With the discrete method, the sphere will consist of a set of vertices
connected by edges filled with triangular faces (some applications support polygonal faces
with more than three edges but they always hide triangles inside) which discretizes the
surface with a certain approximation (Fig. 6.2). Naturally, the more tessellated the surface
of the sphere (more vertices, or smaller triangular faces), the less approximated the surface
will be with respect to the ideal sphere.




Fig. 6.3 Perspective section of the never-built church of S. Margherita, Bologna, 1685 (Agostino
Barelli), informative reconstructive model (Image: Fallavollita)
6.4   3D Modeling Techniques                                                                115




Fig. 6.4 Conceptual scheme of 3D modeling classification (Image: Fallavollita and Foschi)


6.4       3D Modeling Techniques

3D modeling techniques are the practices, processes, and norms used to create the
3D models described with any of the digital representation methods (continuous or dis-
crete). To make an analogy with traditional drawing: the watercolor technique can be
applied to realize perspective views, axonometric views, or double projections and it is
used to obtain a shaded image. Analogously, the technique of parametric modeling can be
used to generate both mesh and NURBS models. The 3D modeling techniques describe
the act of constructing the shapes. These must not be confused with the digital represen-
tation methods that define how the computer represents the mathematical nature of the
shapes.
    Given this assumption we can define the following 3D modeling techniques:

• Procedural algorithmic modeling
  Software programs are e.g., McNeel Rhinoceros + Grasshopper, Autodesk Revit +
  Dynamo, Blender + Geometry Nodes;
• Parametric modeling
  Software programs are e.g., Autodesk Inventor, Dassault Catia, PTC Creo Parametric;
• Automatic reality-based modeling
  Software programs are e.g., Agisoft Metashape, Reality Capture;
116                                                                            6 3D Modeling


• Direct handmade modeling
  Software programs are e.g., Rhinoceros, Autodesk Autocad, Maxon Zbrush, Blender,
  Autodesk 3D Studio Max, Maxon Cinema 4D;
• Hybrid modeling
  Nowadays supported by almost all commercial software packages. Almost all com-
  mercial software packages, nowadays, are considered hybrid modellers.

It is important to note that the classification proposed here is provisional. Professional
3D modelling applications are constantly evolving and the list of techniques and meth-
ods supported is subject to change.As a result, the software examples provided are for
guidance only and are not exclusive.


6.4.1     Procedural and Algorithmic Modeling

Procedural/algorithmic modeling is when the 3D model is generated through the definition
of an ordered set of non-destructive actions/operations/steps/commands that are memo-
rized, and each step can always be accessed and modified to update the final output. The
actions can be in the form of strings of text, mathematical formulas, nodes connected with
wires, and so on. This technique is used when dynamic manipulation of the process is a
key factor in defining the final form (Fig. 6.5).
   Applications that allow modeling through a graphical programming interface, such as
Revit + Dynamo, Houdini, Blender + Geometry Nodes, and Rhinoceros + Grasshopper
[42], are considered algorithmic modelers. All these applications share the same approach,
where each command is in the form of a node that is connected chronologically to other
operations through wires. This makes the algorithm easier to create, explore, investigate,
modify, and share. More apps are nowadays integrating this type of interface because




Fig. 6.5 Creating a 3D model with an algorithm in a graphical scripting language (Image: Foschi)
6.4   3D Modeling Techniques                                                              117


it enables modeling very complex 3D objects with much less effort than hand-made
direct approaches. Furthermore, the algorithms can be shared, to allow others to reuse
and modify them without needing to reproduce the same process step by step.
   “Procedural” means made with/through a procedure, so procedural modeling should
be synonymous with algorithmic modeling, but is sometimes used with a different con-
notation. For example, in software such as Cinema 4D and 3DS Max, it is possible to
model in a non-destructive way by applying and stacking modifiers on simpler starting 3D
geometries. This approach is much less versatile than that with a graphical programming
interface. Nevertheless, both methods can be used to store the whole modelling process,
and access and modify it at each point, so they can be considered as part of the same
category.
   MathWorks, MATLAB and GeoGebra can be used to generate a 3D model through a
sequence of non-destructive commands that are always accessible and modifiable, but the
command needs to be inputted in the form of strings of text or mathematical formulas, so
they are less popular for digital 3D reconstruction of cultural heritage but are still part of
the same category.
   Each modeling technique has algorithms or code hidden inside its commands, but
in 3D modeling in the past few decades algorithmic modeling has acquired a specific
connotation with applications that focus on the algorithm, and it is findable, accessible,
and modifiable at any time. If the algorithms are hidden from users and a lot of manual
interaction is needed to create the 3D model, the technique would rather be categorized
as direct handmade modeling.


6.4.2     Parametric Modeling

Parametric modeling is similar to algorithmic/procedural modeling and sometimes these
terms are interchangeable, despite slight differences. In parametric modeling, it is not
always possible to access each step of the process and modify it non-destructively. For
example, in applications such as Autodesk Fusion 360, PTC Creo, and Inventor, it is pos-
sible to create a 3D object and change the initial parameters (size, position, generative
curves, etc.). However, it is not possible to access the chronological sequence of the oper-
ations performed on the model from the beginning; only some parameters are modifiable,
and it is not possible to add additional operations in between other operations already per-
formed. This is what differentiates parametric modeling from algorithmic/procedural 3D
modeling, although each technique could be used to produce similar results [43]. Their
focus is different: parametric modeling focuses on the input parameters and the outcome;
algorithmic/procedural modeling focuses on the process (Fig. 6.6).
118                                                                         6 3D Modeling


Fig. 6.6 Parametric
modeling of a Ionic column,
by chaning the parameter of
the height we can update the
3D model (Image: Fallavollita
and Foschi)




6.4.3     Automatic Reality-Based Modeling

In automatic reality-based modeling, the 3D model is generated through the application of
a set of computer-based analyses and elaborations (Fig. 6.7), predefined by the developer
of the software, starting from a set of input data (e.g., point clouds or images) captured by
the user from reality with minimal manual interaction. Two main approaches that make
use of automatic reality-based modeling are photogrammetry and laser scanning.
   Someone could claim that user interaction is still necessary to tell the computer how
to use the captured data and to validate the result, however, the polygonal shape and
textures of the model could potentially be automatically generated from start to finish
without needing any interaction. Every other manipulation of the point cloud or the mesh
model itself is not part of the automatic reality-based modeling algorithm, but it rather
must be considered as direct handmade modeling.


6.4.4     Direct Handmade Modeling

Direct handmade 3D modeling is probably the most popular way to generate a shape
with a computer. It consists of generating the 3D model manually by using the tools
provided by the software (Fig. 6.8). It requires constant mouse and keyboard navigation
of the 3D space and interaction of the 3D model, and most of the changes to the model
are destructive, meaning that the model cannot be updated by changing parameters that
were inputted in previous steps. For example, the CAD modeling of a house, the 3D mesh
sculpting of a character, or the low poly polygonal modeling for video games assets can be
6.4   3D Modeling Techniques                                                              119




Fig. 6.7 Automatic reality-based modeling using photogrammetry. Top left: aligned photo and
sparse point cloud; top right: aligned photo and dense cloud; bottom left: mesh; bottom right:
textured model (Image: Foschi)


performed entirely through direct handmade modeling. Digital sculpting is also considered
as direct handmade modeling because the tools that are mainly used specifically resemble
the tools of a sculptor (e.g., scalpel, brushes, scrapers).
   Nowadays applications that only provide direct handmade modeling tools are hard
to find; almost every application integrates some non-destructive workflows for specific
operations because they speed up the shape-finding process. The reverse is also true:
modeling applications that define themselves as algorithmic, automatic reality-based, or
parametric modelers almost always integrate direct handmade modeling tools.
120                                                                         6 3D Modeling




Fig. 6.8 Handmade modeling through digital sculpting and polygonal modeling (Image: Foschi)


6.4.5    Hybrid Modeling

All the modeling techniques that make use of multiple approaches are considered hybrids.
For example, a model can be generated by using direct handmade modeling for the pre-
liminary shape and algorithmic modeling for adding more complex details. So basically,
most of the software packages and applications nowadays are probably adopting hybrid
approaches.
   Among hybrid techniques, building information modeling (BIM) has to be considered
as a special case. It deals with modeling, because the BIM method is more about data
organization, automatization, and interoperation, including information about materials,
prices, forces, technical systems, and construction site facilities. Thus, BIM is mainly used
for the holistic management of architectural projects, and it is not exclusively dedicated
to modeling.
6.5    Configuration Space                                                              121


6.5         Configuration Space

Other than classifying the models by their level of interpretation (raw or informative), the
digital representation method adopted (continuous or discrete), and the technique used to
generate them (procedural, algorithmic, etc.), we can also differentiate models by how the
software considers their configuration space. There are four main ways that applications
are used to describe the configuration space of 3D models (Fig. 6.9):

•     Surface modeling (B-rep)
•     Solid modeling (closed and manifold B-rep)
•     Wireframe modeling (interlinked edges)
•     Volumetric modeling (voxels).

Surface modeling or boundary modeling (B-rep) describes the models as collections of
connected surfaces. This way of considering the models allows open and non-manifold
geometries, in other words, geometries that do not have a clear distinction between the
inside and the outside and thus have no calculable volume.
   Solid modeling describes shapes as volumes and has a predilection for Boolean oper-
ations. It can also be generated by B-reps: this changes how the software checks the
validity of the geometry generated, which basically would not allow generating any open
or non-manifold geometry.
   Most 3D modeling applications adopt hybrid approaches. Computer applications that
define themselves as surface modelers can be used to connect single surfaces and gener-
ate closed poly-surfaces to then apply Boolean operations that by definition can only be
performed between watertight solids. Other applications that define themselves as solid
modelers allow the user to split the solids into the single boundary surfaces that enclose
the volume. These ambiguities that can be observed in many applications are mostly




Fig. 6.9 Surface, solid, wireframe, and volumetric modeling (Image: Foschi)
122                                                                         6 3D Modeling


due to the fact that software developers try to meet users’ needs by implementing new
commands.
   Volumetric models and wireframes of 3D models are other two ways of describing the
configuration space. In volumetric modeling, the volume is usually occupied by points
(points sometimes are shaped like cubes or spheres: then they are called voxels and thus
there is a discrete volume), and each of these points is enriched with specific data, such as
structural stresses, temperature, type of material, density, and so on. This type of model is
mostly used to store and visualize data from tomographic surveys in engineering, arche-
ology, and medicine, or for physical simulations (fluids, rigid bodies, etc.). Lastly, wire
modeling only provides the cage of a 3D model, made of edges that meet at vertices. In
this case, there is no distinction between the outside and inside of the configuration space
and thus it has no calculable volume.


6.6       Best Practices

There are five main aspects to consider for properly designing the model:

•   Semantic organization
•   Scale and level of detail
•   Solid modeling
•   Model tessellation
•   Interoperability

The semantic organization of a 3D model mostly uses one of two methods: philological
and constructive/semantic. The two options may be coincident in some cases but in most
cases, they return differently segmented models. The creator has to decide which path to
choose and how to organize the semantic and logical structure of the model. To give an
example, think of a reconstruction of a column of an Ionic order (it could be a Corinthian
or Doric order, it does not matter). In constructive semantic logic, the base of the column
generally includes the initial part of the column, the attachment to the base formed by
a strip (listello) and an arched connection (apophyge/cavetto/fillet). In philological logic,
however, the base will stop exactly below the shaft of the column and the listello +
apophyge will be part of the shaft and not of the base (Fig. 6.10).
6.6     Best Practices                                                                      123




Fig. 6.10 Different segmentation of the column base: constructive semantic approach on the left,
philological approach on the right (Image: Fallavollita and Foschi)


   The second aspect concerns the scale and the level of detail (LoD). It is generally said
that in virtual space one draws on a scale of 1:1. This statement is misleading because in
architecture the representation is generally on a reduced scale, also in 3D digital modeling.
As in traditional drawing, there are different scales of representation, and thus of LoD.
For example, we could define that a certain model has a LoD comparable to a scale of
1:100 while another 3D model is equivalent to a scale of 1:20 because it has greater
detail. Certain modeling applications, e.g., BIM applications and game engines, allow
for multiple LoDs within the same model. It must be remembered that these different
levels are nothing more than different models that are displayed when different scales are
requested. Again, the analogy with traditional methods is still valid both in theory and in
practice.


      Further reading: Level of detail
      Level of detail and/or development (LoD) is used to differentiate between multiple
      variants of the same model with a different number of polygons or different levels
      of complexity [44]. Some systems distinguish between five gradations (Fig. 6.11).
      Since these are only roughly described in terms of graduation, in practice this often
      leads to intermediate levels, such as LoD 2.5 as a model of the building exte-
      rior envelope including window partitioning. Specific LoD classifications have been
      developed in some fields of application, as described for BIM [45] or, with different
      LoD scales, CityGML for GIS [46].
124                                                                          6 3D Modeling




   Fig. 6.11 Model detail qualities of virtual 3D reconstruction according to City GML [46]
   (Image: Foschi)



   Solid modeling is the third aspect of architectural modeling [47]. One way to obtain
traditional and manageable models is to conceive and draw a 3D model composed of
closed, non-self-intersecting solids. There are two main reasons for following this proce-
dure: conceptual and technical. The conceptual is most important and concerns the logical
construction of architecture. The real world of constructions is made up of solid objects
that cannot under any circumstances interpenetrate or be “floating”: physical and static
laws do not allow exceptions. Of course, in the virtual world, these exceptions are allowed:
we can construct two solids that intersect or are hovering in space; moreover, we can con-
ceive objects composed of single surfaces or open poly-surfaces. These exceptions must
be avoided because they would have no possible equivalent in architectural reality. The
technical reason concerns some consequences that these exceptions could have in digital
representation. If a 3D model contains some parts composed of open surfaces or open
meshes, they will not be 3D printable. In addition, open or self-intersecting poly-surfaces
6.6     Best Practices                                                                    125


may cause errors and glitches in the rendering phase. If two surfaces overlap, they will be
likely displayed as a patchy or flickering surface; this is because the computer does not
know which surface is on top and returns a confused surface (known as z-fighting effect).
Moreover, where the light hits open poly-surfaces there may be unrealistic shadow effects
or light leaking. For these technical reasons, it is useful to conceive and build architec-
tural digital 3D models according to non-self-intersecting closed and manifold solids. The
possible objection to this simple solid modeling principle could be that in some cases
computer graphics requires specific measures to obtain rendering effects or to lighten the
model. For example, when you need to render a glass object that contains a liquid such as
a glass of wine, the element of the wine should slightly be interpenetrated to (or moved
away from) the solid of the glass. Or in video games, all the surfaces that are not visible
are eliminated to make the game lighter to run. These exceptions should not undermine
or weaken the solid modeling principle as they are usually implemented at a later stage
if needed.
    The fourth aspect concerns tessellation, the process of transforming mathematical
models into polygonal models. Switching from a mathematical environment to a polygo-
nal one is easy because it is just a matter of populating the continuous surfaces with points
and connecting them with edges and planar faces. The inverse is hard because as soon as
they are converted into polygonal models, NURBS models lose all the information about
the curvature of their surfaces. Nevertheless, even if this conversion is destructive and
passes from a continuous to a discretized model, it is necessary both to produce shaded
rendered images and to eventually be able to 3D print the model. In fact, each 3D mod-
eling software that handles NURBS internally converts them into meshes in real time to
allow the graphic cards to shade and display the models in the interactive view while
working on the model. Because of that, someone might say that to produce images it is
more convenient to directly model with discretized surfaces. This might be true some-
times, but if the discretized model turns out to be too much or too little tessellated at
the end of the modeling process, the only way to update it is to entirely remodel it from
scratch, which is why the NURBS model is almost always preferable at least when aiming
to accuracy and versatility.


      Summary
      The chapter deals with the concepts of raw model and informative model; it clarifies
      the concept of semantic segmentation and defines the digital representation methods
      and 3D modeling techniques; finally, it lists the different configuration spaces of a
      3D model in different software packages.
      Standards and guidelines

      • Beacham, R.; Denard, H.; Niccolucci, F. An Introduction to the London Charter.
        In Papers from the Joint Event CIPA/VAST/EG/EuroMed Event, Ioannides, M.,
        Arnold, D., Niccolucci, F., Mania, K., Eds.; 2006; pp. 263–269.
126                                                                            6 3D Modeling


  • Denard, H. (2009) “The London Charter. For the Computer-Based Visualization
    of Cultural Heritage, Version 2.1.” (https://www.londoncharter.org, accessed on
    1.2.2023).
  • Principles of Seville. International Principles of Virtual Archaeology. Ratified by
    the 19th ICOMOS General Assembly in New Delhi, December 2017 (http://sev
    illeprinciples.com, accessed on 1.2.2023).

  Key literature

  • Albisinni, P. and L.D. Carlo, eds. Architettura disegno modello: Verso un archivio
    digitale dell’opera di maestri del XX secolo. 2011, Gangemi Editore (2011) [47].
  • Aubin, P.F. (2013). Renaissance Revit: Creating Classical Architecture with
    Modern Software. G3B Press [43].
  • Apollonio, FI. (2012). Architettura in 3D. Modelli digitali per i sistemi cognitivi.
    Milano: Bruno Mondadori [16].
  • Migliari, R., Geometria Descrittiva—vol. 1, vol. 2—Metodi e costruzione. 2009:
    Città Studi Edizioni [48].
  • Pottmann, H., Architectural geometry. 2007: Bentley institute press [49].
  • AAD_ALGORITHMS AIDED DESIGN, Parametric Strategies using Grasshop-
    per. 2014: Le Penseur [50].




References

1. Spallone R (2015) Reconstruction modeling, animation and digital fabrication of ‘architectures
   on paper’. Two ideal houses by Carlo Mollino. SCIRES-IT-SCIentific RESearch and Informa-
   tion Technology 5(1):101–114
2. Bianchini C et al (2014) Survey m, interpretation as multidisciplinary components of a Knowl-
   edge System. SCIRES-IT-SCIentific RESearch and Information Technology 4(1):15–24
3. Shan JT (2008) C. Topographic laser ranging and scanning: principles and processing. CRC,
   Boca Raton, FL, USA, p 590
4. Luhmann T et al (2006) Close range photogrammetry: principles, techniques and applications.
   Whittles Publishing, Dunbeath, Scotland, UK
5. Remondino F et al (2005) 3D modeling of close-range objects: photogrammetry or laser scan-
   ning? In: Beraldin JA et al (eds) Proceedings SPIE 5665, videometrics VIII, p 56650M. https://
   doi.org/10.1117/12.586294
6. Alshawabkeh Y et al (2021) Integration of laser scanner and photogrammetry for heritage BIM
   enhancement. ISPRS Int J Geo Inf 10(5):316
7. Tamke M et al (2014) From point clouds to definitions of architectural space-potentials of
   automated extraction of semantic information from point clouds for the building profession
8. Münster S, Utescher R, Ulutas Aydogan S (2021) Digital topics on cultural heritage inves-
   tigated: how can data-driven and data-guided methods support to identify current topics and
   trends in digital heritage? Built Heritage 5(1):25. https://doi.org/10.1186/s43238-021-00045-7
9. Ioannides M et al (2020) European study on quality in 3D digitisation of tangible cultural
   heritage (VIGIE 2020/654)
References                                                                                       127


10. 4CH - Competence Centre for the Conservation of Cultural Heritage (2021)
11. Di Stefano F et al (2021) Mobile 3D scan LiDAR: a literature review. Geomat Nat Haz Risk
    12(1):2387–2429
12. Remondino F et al (2017) A critical review of automated photogrammetric processing of large
    datasets. Int Arch Photogram Remote Sens Spat Inf Sci XLII-2/W5:591–599
13. Fiorucci M et al (2020) Machine learning for cultural heritage: a survey. Pattern Recogn Lett
    133:102–108
14. Münster S, Maiwald F, Lenardo ID, Henriksson J, Isaac A, Graf M et al (2024) Artificial
    Intelligence for Digital Heritage Innovation. Setting up a R&D roadmap for Europe. MDPI
    Heritage
15. Russo M (2021) AR in the architecture domain: state of the art. Appl Sci-Basel 11(15):6800
16. Apollonio FI (2012) Architettura in 3D. Modelli digitali per i sistemi cognitivi. Milano, Bruno
    Mondadori
17. Pfarr-Harfst M (2010) Dokumentationssystem für Digitale Rekonstruktionen am Beispiel der
    Grabanlage Zhaoling, Provinz Saanxi, China. Dissertation
18. Pattee A et al (2022) A machine learning approach to assist architectural research by matching
    images directly with text. In: EUROMED 2022
19. Lowe DG (2004) Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints. Int J Comput Vis
    60(2):91–110
20. Yi KM et al (2016) LIFT: learned invariant feature transform. In: Leibe B et al (eds) Computer
    vision – ECCV 2016. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 467–483
21. Krizhevsky A et al (2017) ImageNet classification with deep convolutional neural networks.
    Commun ACM 60(6):84–90
22. Jahrer M et al (2008) Learned local descriptors for recognition and matching. Proc Comput Vis
    Winter Worksh 2008:39–46
23. Münster S et al (2019) Digital cultural heritage meets digital humanities. Int Arch Photogram
    Remote Sens Spat Inf Sci XLII-2/W15:813–820
24. Bell P et al (2019) Computer Vision und Kunstgeschichte – Dialog zweier Bildwissenschaften.
    In: Kuroczynski P et al (eds) Digital art history. Heidelberg, pp 61–78
25. Martinovic A et al (2015) 3D all the way: semantic segmentation of urban scenes from start to
    end in 3D. IEEE Comput Vis & Pattern Recogn 4456–4465
26. Hackel T et al (2016) Fast semantic segmentation of 3D point clouds with strongly varying
    density. ISPRS Ann 3(3):177–184
27. Aiger D et al (2017) Large-scale 3D scene classification with multi-view volumetric CNN
28. n.b. (2019) ArchiMediaL. Enriching and linking historical architectural and urban image col-
    lections. http://archimedial.net/
29. Radovic M et al (2017) Object recognition in aerial images using convolutional neural networks.
    J Imaging 3(2)
30. Khademi S et al (2021) Deep learning from history. In: Niebling F et al (eds) Research and edu-
    cation in urban history in the age of digital libraries. Springer International Publishing, Cham,
    pp 213–233
31. 4dReply Closing the 4D Real World Reconstruction Loop. https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/
    770784. Accessed 8 Feb 2022
32. Martin-Brualla R et al (2021) NeRF in the wild: neural radiance fields for unconstrained photo
    collections
33. Münster S, Maiwald F, Bruschke J, Kröber C, Sun Y, Dworak D, Munir I, Komorowicz D, Beck
    C, Münster DL (2024) A digital 4D information system at world scale: Research challenges,
    approaches and preliminary results. MDPI Appl. Sciences
34. Zielke T (2020) Is Artificial Intelligence Ready for Standardization?
35. Kniaz VV et al (2019) Generative adversarial networks for single photo 3d reconstruction. Int
    Arch Photogram Remote Sens Spat Inf Sci XLII-2/W9:403–408
128                                                                                 6 3D Modeling


36. Hermoza R et al (2018) 3D Reconstruction of incomplete archaeological objects using a gener-
    ative adversarial network. Proc Comput Graph Int 2018:5–11
37. Nogales Moyano A et al (2021) ARQGAN: an evaluation of generative adversarial networks’
    approaches for automatic virtual restoration of Greek temples
38. Microsoft In Culture (2021) See ancient Olympia brought to life
39. Mildenhall B et al (2021) Nerf: representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis.
    Commun ACM 65(1):99–106
40. Srinivasan PP et al (2021) Nerv: neural reflectance and visibility fields for relighting and view
    synthesis, pp. 7495–7504
41. Geometria Descrittiva - vol. 1 - Metodi e costruzione RM, CittàStudiEdizioni, 2009, ISBN
    9788825173291
42. AAD_ALGORITHMS AIDED DESIGN PSuGPLP, 2014. ISBN 978–88–95315–30–0
43. Aubin PF (2013) Renaissance revit: creating classical architecture with modern software. G3B
    Press
44. Luebke DP (2003) Level of detail for 3D graphics. The Morgan Kaufmann series in computer
    graphics and geometric modeling, 1st edn.
45. Martens B (2019) Virtuelle Rekonstruktion: Building Information Modelling (BIM) als
    Rahmenbedingung für eine langfristige Nutzung von digitalen 3D-Gebäudemodellen. In:
    Kuroczyński P et al (eds) Der Modelle Tugend 2.0: Digitale 3D-Rekonstruktion als virtueller
    Raum der architekturhistorischen Forschung. Heidelberg University Press, Heidelberg
46. OGC (2012) OGC city geography markup language (CityGML) Encoding standard, version
    2.0.0
47. Albisinni P et al (eds) (2011) Architettura disegno modello: Verso un archivio digitale dell’opera
    di maestri del XX secolo. Gangemi Editore (2011), ISBN 9788849220988
48. Migliari R (2009) Geometria Descrittiva - vol. 1 - Metodi e costruzione
49. Pottmann H (2007) Architectural geometry
50. AAD ALGORITHMS AIDED DESIGN (2014) Parametric strategies using grasshopper




Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropri-
ate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license
and indicate if changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statu-
tory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder.
