Legislation
                                                                                           10



   Abstract

   This chapter is proposed to provide an overview of the different types of legal rights
   and legislation relating to 3D reconstruction. Since reconstructions originate from var-
   ious sources and comprise intellectual work by multiple persons, they affect different
   levels of legal and property rights, although the specific legal situation greatly depends
   on national laws.




   Guiding questions
   • What generic legal frameworks are there for 3D reconstruction?
   • What types of licenses are there?


   Basic terms
   • Copyright
   • Open licenses
   • Closed licenses
   • Public domain




© The Author(s) 2024                                                                     199
S. Münster et al., Handbook of Digital 3D Reconstruction of Historical Architecture,
Synthesis Lectures on Engineers, Technology, & Society 28,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-43363-4_10
200                                                                            10 Legislation


10.1      Intellectual Property

Intellectual Property rights (IP) comprise a wide range of legal rights related to intellectual
works. The most relevant concepts are:

• Copyright is the “exclusive right to produce copies and to control an original literary,
  musical, or artistic work, granted by law for a specified number of years” (Collins
  Dictionary 2022). Some other types of intellectual output such as computer code are
  borderline cases and protected in some nations. When an individual creates and intel-
  lectual work, that author is granted a copyright. A main distinction is whether copyright
  is transferable (as in the US) or is not transferable and belongs to the author (as in
  most European states).
• Usage rights can be granted by copyright holders to users of a specific work and
  define types and modalities of this usage. These rights can be granted on an individual
  basis or via standard licenses, offering predefined conditions to users. Licenses may be
  closed, or open to allow unpaid use under certain conditions, e.g., naming the author.
• Potentially, 3D modeling can affect rights, e.g., personality rights (in cases of digi-
  tizing or modeling humans) or security (in cases of military objects or 3D printable
  weapons).




10.2      Legal Aspects

With regard to media, there are several legal aspects to 3D modeling. The most relevant
are copyright and design laws [1, 2]:

• While older cultural heritage objects are now in the public domain [3], younger
  objects may be subject to copyright. Especially for museum objects, other legisla-
  tion on property rights may effectively prevent 3D digitization without an exhibitor’s
  permission [4].
• Reproduction media such as photographs potentially become an original object and
  add intellectual property for both copyright and design laws. The legal situation is
  uneven, not least with regard to the level of originality necessary (especially in the
  digitization of analog heritage objects, e.g., plans) to gain intellectual property rights
  for media depicting or digitizing a cultural heritage object [5, 6].
• A 3D model may be subject to copyright [7]. It is currently being debated whether
  3D digitization fulfills the requirements for being original or is simply copying and
  therefore creates nonoriginal works [8]. Although the situation for 3D reconstructions
  seems more clear, as substantial originality is inherent, not all national legislation sees
  reconstructions as original work [9].
10.3   Licenses: Open, Closed, or Public?                                              201


• 3D printing is subject to specific legislation. Specific overviews about copyright in the
  EU for 3D printing date from 2010 [10], 2014 [11], and 2019 [12].

Since legislation is implemented very much depending on the national situation, there
are various national laws, e.g., for Germany maintained by NFDI4Culture for imagery
[13] or web usage [14]. Another main distinction concerns the use of restricted media for
commercial purposes or in research and education. In most national legislation there are
exceptions for the latter cases and less restricted legislation applies.


10.3      Licenses: Open, Closed, or Public?

Recent developments at the EU level [15]—the Open Data Directive [16] and the Digital
Single Market Directive [17]—provide political and legal framework conditions for dig-
ital humanities and digital heritage research. Despite this EU-wide attempt, the current
situation on a member state level is very uneven [15].


  Further reading: The FAIR Principles and open science
  Co-production and user-generated content enable cultural innovation. Many institu-
  tions and members of scientific communities therefore do not limit themselves to the
  digital and open provision of cultural objects and data. Fundamental principles for
  this are that the data are findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR).
  These require rich and interoperable metadata, high quality and resolution, open
  interfaces and open (data exchange) formats. 3D objects and data should be made
  available following the FAIR principles, both technically and legally [18]. The aim
  of this paradigm is to support the use of research data or works by others without
  restriction: specific guidelines to ensure FAIR research [19].


   Another main distinction is between open and closed licenses. Creative content under
closed licenses cannot be used without a specifically granted permission and in most cases
payment to the license holder. Open licenses refer to creative content (media, software
etc.) which the general public can access and use under certain conditions without having
to explicitly ask for permission. Various open-source licensing models predefine condi-
tions under which creative content can be used. Creative Commons (CC), a major open
license, predefines modalities which enable everyone to use content under the same condi-
tions and free of charge (Fig. 10.1). In contrast to closed and open source, public domain
means creative works to which no intellectual property rights or copyright exist. Usually,
public domain is coupled to periods—in most cases works enter the public domain 70
years after the death of the author. Public domain goods can be used by anyone for any
purpose without a license or obligation to pay.
202                                                                            10 Legislation


  Abbrev.     Symbol       Sharing,     Naming       Commercial      Editing      Sharing
                           remix,       of author    use allowed                  only un-
                           amending                                               der same
                           allowed                                                license




Fig. 10.1 Types of creative commons licenses [20]


   A specific facet of open versus closed content is open versus closed source—the legal
and technical availability and reusability of software code or files. Closed source code
(e.g., programs or 3D model files) is not publicly available or readable (e.g., proprietary
software). In contrast, open-source files are publicly available and can be used under an
open license.


   Summary
   3D reconstructions are linked to different legal rights, mostly concerning intellectual
   property. Creative works by other authors use as sources are subject to copyright,
   which can also be potentially obtained by the author(s) of a 3D reconstruction.
   Licenses can be closed or open—the first are paid, the second can be used for free.
   Open licensing modes—esp. Creative Commons—are well established now.
   Concepts

   • Copyright is the “exclusive right to produce copies and to control an original
     literary, musical, or artistic work, granted by law for a specified number of years”
     [21].
   • Creative Commons (CC) are different mixable standard license agreements,
     through which license holders can define the legal conditions for distributing
     and sharing their creative content free of charge.
References                                                                                        203



   Key literature

   • Hoeren, T. (2021). Internetrecht: De Gruyter [14].
   • Fischer, V. and G. Petri, Bildrechte in der kunsthistorischen Praxis—ein
     Leitfaden.—Zweite, überarbeitete und erweiterte Auflage. 2022, Heidelberg:
     arthistoricum [13].
   • Ulutas Aydogan, S., Münster, S., Girardi, D., Palmirani, M., & Vitali, F. (2021).
     A Framework to Support Digital Humanities and Cultural Heritage Studies
     Research, Cham [15].




References

 1. Borissova V (2018) Cultural heritage digitization and related intellectual property issues. J Cult
    Herit 34:145–150
 2. Cieslik E (2020) 3D Digitization in cultural heritage institutions guidebook
 3. Wallace A et al (2020) Revisiting access to cultural heritage in the public domain: EU and
    international developments. IIC-Int Rev Intellect Prop Compet Law 51(7):823–855
 4. Euler E et al (2017) Bereit zu teilen?
 5. Truyen F et al (2016) Copyright, cultural heritage and photography: a gordian knot? Cultural
    heritage in a changing world. Springer, Cham, pp 77–96
 6. Margoni T (2014) The digitisation of cultural heritage: originality, derivative works and (non)
    original photographs. Derivative Works and (Non) Original Photographs, 3 December 2014
 7. Elias C (2019) Whose digital heritage? Contemporary art, 3D printing and the limits of cultural
    property. Third Text 33(6):687–707
 8. Oruc P (2020) 3D Digitisation of cultural heritage copyright implications of the methods, pur-
    poses and collaboration. 11 J INTELL PROP INFO TECH & ELEC COM L (149)
 9. Probst S (2019) 3D-Druck trifft auf Urheber-und Patentrecht
10. Bradshaw S et al (2010) The intellectual property implications of low-cost 3D printing. ScriptEd
    7:5
11. European Commission (2014) Overview of 3D printing & intellectual property law. Under the
    contract with the Directorate General Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs
    (MARKT2014/083/D)
12. Osborn LS (2019) 3D printing and intellectual property
13. Fischer V et al (2022) Bildrechte in der kunsthistorischen Praxis – ein Leitfaden. - Zweite,
    überarbeitete und erweiterte Auflage
14. Hoeren T (2021) Internetrecht
15. Ulutas Aydogan S et al (2021) A framework to support digital humanities and cultural heritage
    studies research. In: Cham, 2021. Research and education in urban history in the age of digital
    libraries. Springer International Publishing, pp 237–267
16. The European Parliament and The Council of the European Union (2019) DIRECTIVE (EU)
    2019/1024 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 20 June 2019
    on open data and the re-use of public sector information (recast)
204                                                                               10 Legislation


17. The European Parliament and The Council of the European Union (2019) DIRECTIVE (EU)
    2019/790 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 17 April 2019
    on copyright and related rights in the Digital Single Market and amending Directives 96/9/EC
    and 2001/29/EC (Text with EEA relevance)
18. Forschungsdaten.org (2022) FAIR data principles. https://www.forschungsdaten.org/index.php/
    FAIR_data_principles
19. Wilkinson MD et al (2016) The FAIR guiding principles for scientific data management and
    stewardship. Sci Data 3:160018
20. Burgert (2022) Symbole von Creative Commons Schweiz CC BY 4.0
21. Collins Dictionary (2022). https://www.collinsdictionarycom/de/worterbuch/englisch/copyright




Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropri-
ate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license
and indicate if changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statu-
tory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder.
