Documentation
                                                                                                8



   Abstract

   The documentation of the working steps, the decisions made in a reconstruction, the
   applied method, and the results form one of the cornerstones of scientific practice.
   Over the centuries, scientific publication established itself with fixed basic principles,
   such as verifiability of methods, objectivity, disclosure of sources, comprehensibility
   of argumentation, accessibility of results, accuracy, reliability, and uniformity [1]. In
   computer-aided, hypothetical 3D reconstruction of destroyed architecture, the appli-
   cation of the above basic principles faces an as yet unsolved challenge. The model
   creation process is rarely documented, and when it is, the documentation is usually
   not publicly available. The knowledge embedded in reconstructions, scientific inter-
   pretation, argumentation, and hypothesis, is in danger of being lost. Due to the lack
   of resources, diverse and rapidly developing software applications, modelling methods
   and types, no application-based method for documenting and publishing 3D models
   has been established. Three decades into the spread of computer-assisted 3D visual-
   ization in the research and mediation of cultural heritage, discussion of the question of
   what and how to document has intensified. The Internet as a publication venue seems
   to make sense to most. Web-based documentation requires technical infrastructures
   and services as well as defined scientific methods for comprehensible modeling and
   sustainable provision. The following chapter is dedicated to describing and clarifying
   these developments.




© The Author(s) 2024                                                                     165
S. Münster et al., Handbook of Digital 3D Reconstruction of Historical Architecture,
Synthesis Lectures on Engineers, Technology, & Society 28,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-43363-4_8
166                                                                    8 Documentation



  Guiding questions
  • What guidelines and projects exist?
  • Why is documentation important?
  • What needs to be documented?
  • How can one document and publish?


  Basic terms
  • Metadata and paradata
  • Scientificity and traceability
  • Findability and accessibility
  • Interoperability and reusability




8.1      Introduction

The topic of documenting 3D reconstructions is examined below under four questions:

1. Why is documentation important?
2. What kind of research data are we dealing with at all?
3. What should be documented?
4. How should documentation be done?

The consideration of these aspects has two focal points: firstly, the documentation
of information accompanying a 3D model and secondly, the documentation of the
decision-making processes related to the reconstruction. Documentation should provide
information about the circumstances surrounding the reconstruction and the digital model
behind it as well as information about the actors, backgrounds, and technical conditions.
Documentation ensures that the occasion, purpose, background, sources, and the decision-
makers and others’ creative considerations for and against creating a reconstruction in a
certain way, are comprehensible. Documentation is part of good scientific practice [2].
In every scientific discipline, documentation of research results and the processes behind
them is required in order to make findings and justifications comprehensible and available
to future generations as a basis for further research.
   Documentation of the decision-making processes and the sources behind them can be
highly important for one’s own reconstruction practice. Knowledge and effort have gone
into reconstruction models. These models therefore have a certain value. If one wants
to use and change these models again later, it is important to be able to reconstruct the
8.2 Why Documentation is Important                                                      167


decision-making processes and the sources used in order to resume or repeat the work with
as little effort of one’s own as possible. Furthermore, such documentation can strengthen
one’s own reputation. If reconstructions are visible to the public and questions about
their credibility arise, then documentation can help to communicate the earlier decisions
and thus reject any doubts raised. If, on the other hand, objections are justified, then
documentation helps one to make changes in a reconstruction model more quickly, more
precisely, and thus more economically. Especially in the commercial sector, such as TV
documentaries, entertainment, or reconstructions for museums, this can be advantageous.


8.2      Why Documentation is Important

8.2.1    Scientific Significance

Digital models have become widely established as tools of mediation and research in
the context of architectural and urban studies [3]. Especially the increasing dissemination
of digital architectural reconstructions in exhibitions and research projects and the public
funding that often accompanies them raises questions about the sustainability of the recon-
structions presented and the knowledge embedded in them. It is necessary to ask where
and how reconstruction models and 3D datasets can be permanently presented, secured,
and accompanying information documented. Yet it is challenge to document decision-
making processes and the underlying thought processes and interpretations in digital
reconstructions in a publicly accessible, transparent, and comprehensible way. If this does
not succeed, the knowledge and thus the potential scientific value of a reconstruction
risks being lost. Simply saving the results is not sufficient for valid documentation. The
publication of research results from digital 3D reconstructions in print media, television,
exhibitions and the Internet, including pure 3D repositories such as Sketchfab.com, usu-
ally only represent the result of research processes along with rudimentary accompanying
information, but not their genesis and the discourse conducted in the process. Moreover,
the lack of documentation of the reconstruction processes and the decisions and justifi-
cations they contain leads to the loss of knowledge about rejected solutions. However,
these contain valuable information that was developed during the reconstruction process.
In the event of a change in the source situation or a re-evaluation of the sources used, the
documentation of sources that were rejected or not considered as plausible would make
it possible to start the reconstruction process anew and ideally make use of the earlier
findings.
    Actors have been aware of the problem of lack of documentation for a long time: in
theoretical policy papers such as the London Charter [4] and Principles of Seville [5] (→
Scholarly Method) are formulated in terms of sustainability, verifiability, and knowledge
preservation: “The documentation of evaluative, analytical, deductive, interpretative and
168                                                                           8 Documentation


creative decisions made in the course of computer-assisted visualization should be avail-
able in such a way that the relationship between research sources, tacit knowledge and
explicit conclusions and visualization-based results can be understood” [6]. The working
group on digital 3D construction for digital humanities in the German-speaking countries
(DHd) sees the documentation as one of five core issues, as is reflected in their 2019
publication, Der Modelle Tugend 2.0 [7]. Despite this awareness, scientific documenta-
tion of digital reconstruction is an absolute exception even in 2024. Several reasons seem
to converge here. To date, documentation is generally neither explicitly demanded by
funding agencies, nor are additional funds made available for it. This applies to funding
lines of the federal and state governments, but also to museum commissions, in that dig-
ital reconstructions often trigger or are created based on the latest state of research and
with scientific advice. Thus, it is usually left up to the persons and institutions that create
a reconstruction to finance documentation with their own funds. Furthermore, there is no
agreement on documentation standards, structure, or content.


8.2.2     Preliminary Work

At the latest since the EPOCH Research Agenda [8] in 2004–2008, the topic of docu-
menting 3D reconstructions has come into focus. One result of this four-year research
project is the London Charter, which remains decisive for theoretical considerations and
practical implementations. For some years now, there have been initial attempts in the
professional community to meet the challenge of a lack of documentation with concrete
solutions. These include a good overview of the ideas that have emerged up to 2017 [9]
and a first draft for a tool for systematic documentation [10] with a web-based tool based
on wiki technology (i.e., interlinked pages). The aim of the tool was to systematically doc-
ument sources, their interpretation, hypothesis formation, and the resulting visualizations.
However, the development never went beyond a prototype.
   To better ensure data sharing, projects have focused on data modeling and linked
data technologies in the context of digital 3D modeling—most notably the CIDOC Con-
ceptual Reference Model (CRM) [11, 12], an ontology for cultural heritage, originally
designed for use in museums. Within the framework of the project Virtual Reconstruc-
tions in Transnational Research Environments—The Portal: Castles and Parks in Former
East Prussia [13], the first CIDOC CRM-referenced application ontology was developed
to document the creative decision-making processes and the results of a digital (hypo-
thetical) 3D reconstruction, including versions and variants. In follow-up projects at the
Hochschule Mainz, the OntSciDoc3D application ontology has been successfully used
in the semantic enrichment and labeling of digital 3D models with information on the
provenance of the digital 3D dataset and the historical context of the represented object
[14].1

1 Link to the. owl file: https://www.ontscidoc3d.hs-mainz.de/ontology, accessed on 1.2.2023.
8.2 Why Documentation is Important                                                       169


   At the Hochschule für Technik und Wirtschaft Dresden, the online tool DokuVis was
developed, which enables exchange between modelers and scientific advisors directly on
the 3D model. Further features are the display of variants and versions, integration of
project management, measurement of distances and surfaces, and the ability to generate
section views of and interactively compare sources with the model [15].
   Extensive theoretical considerations on the topic of documentation were already
developed in 2010 at the Department of Digital Design at the Technische Universität
Darmstadt (TUD), first preliminary work 2010 Mieke Pfarr [16]. This department started
from the assessment that simple, intuitive, and user-friendly approaches are needed to
move toward a practice of scientific documentation. In 2016, the Reconstruction Argu-
mentation Method (RAM) was developed, which was transferred into an online-based
documentation tool, ScieDoc,2 in 2017 [17, 18]. The core of the RAM approach in
ScieDoc is the division of a reconstructed building into different spatial areas. Each of
these areas is represented by 2D images of the reconstruction (renderings), by images of
the sources used, and by a textual argumentation explaining how the reconstruction was
inferred from the sources. For each area, it is possible to map several variants. ScieDoc
was used in 86 projects by 2022.
   Currently, Building Information Modeling (BIM), the 3D modeling standard in the con-
struction industry, is being discussed in the field of digital (hypothetical) reconstructions
[19–21]. BIM enables to store project information and to assign customized properties
to building elements. BIM supporting software ensures interoperability and reusability of
the project data through the common data exchange format Industry Foundation Classes.3
   With an archaeological approach, Demetrescu [22] sees virtual reconstruction as an
extension of the findings in excavations and links them with virtual elements and sources.
Prototypically, an interactive tool was developed for the visualization and exploration of
the data in conjunction with the 3D models [9].
   Many actors also dealt with partial aspects of documentation. Above all, the degree
of uncertainty associated with incomplete sources and the wide scope for interpretation
plays a prominent role. Various metrics were developed, such as the level of hypothesis
[23], or one based on fuzzy logic [24], or a classification depending on the information
content and the need for interpretation of sources. [25] The question of visualizing the
different levels of uncertainty directly on the model has been discussed several times [26]
(→ Shading Aspects).
   Thus, although several approaches to documentation of decision-making processes
exist, the proposed solutions should rather be seen as prototypes that cannot be used
ad hoc by a broad community. In 2022, the DFG project IDOVIR started, which com-
bines the approaches of the abovementioned projects ScieDoc and DokuVis and uses the
RAM method developed at the TUD. It is free to use and takes 15 min to learn. As it


2 http://www.sciedoc.org, accessed on 1.2.2023.
3 ISO 16739-1:2018, see https://www.iso.org/standard/70303.html.
170                                                                        8 Documentation


is embedded in the system landscape of the University and State Library Darmstadt, the
professional provision and continuation of the project results is guaranteed.
   Beyond documentation of the decision-making processes, it is desirable to be able to
permanently refer to a reconstruction and to cite it well in a scientific sense. For many
reconstructions that are created for exhibitions or documentaries, permanent access to the
results achieved is often not guaranteed. For this purpose, it would be useful to have
freely accessible 3D repositories, which visualize 3D models and make 3D datasets avail-
able, document the corresponding metadata, and provide information on the often unclear
legal situation regarding the (re-)use of results or models of a reconstruction. Complemen-
tary to the IDOVIR project in this context is the DFG-funded project DFG 3D-Viewer,
which provides an infrastructure for publishing, locating, and displaying 3D models and
records information on the circumstances surrounding both the digital reconstruction and
the digital 3D model behind it.
   Both DFG projects have agreed on common data structures and terms and are also
seeking this understanding with other initiatives in the field of digital infrastructures.
Both are briefly explained and recommended in the section on key projects at the end of
this chapter.
   One general challenge is that no new tool, method, or standard can solve the restrictions
concerning the publication of the (historical) sources on which a reconstruction is based
[27]. This would be necessary for scientific discourse, but the rights holders do not always
allow this or demand fees, a circumstance that results in major restrictions and hurdles.
General agreements would have to be reached here.


8.2.3    Current Developments

Documentation that enables computer-assisted work with the digitally available research
data requires formalization of the knowledge in a human- and machine-readable form.
This is primarily a matter of setting up rules for all data that clearly communicate the logic
and meaning of that data to the computer, so that instead of data ruins, a homogeneous
and consistent database is created.
   As early as the 1980s, fundamental ideas and concepts for the description and docu-
mentation of art and architecture were developed. Foto Marburg provided an important
basis for this with far-reaching considerations on the cataloging of cultural heritage [28],
which led to their documentation and administration system MIDAS in 1989 [29].
   Standards enable subject-specific classification of subject matter and make an essential
contribution to the unambiguous indexing of cultural heritage. First and foremost, these
are the controlled Getty Vocabularies, such as Art & Architecture Thesaurus (AAT), Getty
Thesaurus of Geographic Names (TGN), Cultural Objects Name Authority (CONA), and
Union List of Artist Names (ULAN), as well as ICONCLASS for iconographic indexing.
8.2 Why Documentation is Important                                                          171



   Further Reading: Classification Standards for Knowledge Modeling
      Controlled Vocabularies: A controlled vocabulary is an organized arrangement
      of words and phrases used to index content and/or to retrieve content through
      browsing or searching. It typically includes preferred and variant terms and has
      a defined scope or describes a specific domain [52, p. 12].
      Thesaurus: A thesaurus combines the characteristics of synonym ring lists and
      taxonomies, together with additional features. A thesaurus is a semantic net-
      work of unique concepts, including relationships between synonyms, broader
      and narrower (parent/child) contexts, and other related concepts. Thesauri may
      be monolingual or multilingual [52, p. 24].
      Taxonomies: A taxonomy is an orderly classification for a defined domain. It
      may also be known as a faceted vocabulary. It comprises controlled vocabulary
      terms (generally only preferred terms) organized into a hierarchical structure.
      Each term in a taxonomy is in one or more parent/child (broader/ narrower)
      relationships to other terms in the taxonomy. There can be different types of
      parent/child relationships, such as whole/part, genus/species, or instance relation-
      ships. However, in good practice, all children of a given parent share the same
      type of relationship. A taxonomy may differ from a thesaurus in that it gener-
      ally has shallower hierarchies and a less complicated structure. For example, it
      often has no equivalent (synonyms or variant terms) or related terms (associative
      relationships) [52, p. 22].
      Ontologies: These are less commonly used than the above three standards for
      art information. In common usage in computer science, an ontology is a formal,
      machine-readable specification of a conceptual model in which concepts, prop-
      erties, relationships, functions, constraints, and axioms are all explicitly defined
      [52, p. 24]. A main distinction is between application-overarching reference
      ontologies and the deriving application ontologies, which are purpose-specific
      applications of reference ontologies [13].


In cultural heritage, CIDOC CRM has prevailed as a reference ontology since the mid-
1990s. This human- and machine-readable formalization of knowledge is based on around
100 classes (entities) and 150 relations (properties) that describe the essential facts and the
context of an object, starting from an activity, e.g., the creation of a work of art (Fig. 8.1).
   The demand for the worldwide networking of knowledge is being addressed by the
development of the Internet into Web 3.0. The idea of a Web 3.0 network of knowledge
was first presented in 2001 under the term Semantic Web by Tim Berners-Lee, the inven-
tor of the World Wide Web [30]. It is based on a Resource Description Framework
(RDF), a graph-based data format. The basic units of RDF are the triples consisting of
subject, predicate and object. Data models such as CIDOC CRM [31] are used to describe
172                                                                       8 Documentation




Fig. 8.1 Graphical representation of the CIDOC CRM referenced application ontology OntSci-
Doc3D for mapping the knowledge of the 3D reconstruction process, https://www.ontscidoc3d.hs-
mainz.de/ontology/, accessed on 1.2.2023 (Image: AI MAINZ, 2019)


individual basic units, which in turn enable the machines to read out the meaning of the
digitally available data (semantics = meaning). If the RDF datasets (graph databases) are
linked with other external, similarly structured online resources, a network of information
is created that extends beyond the datasets themselves and is known as Linked (Open)
Data.
    The formalized and structured documentation of knowledge is the basic prerequisite
for the processing information or making it available digitally. The proper handling of
digital research data became an important concern of national education and research
initiatives in the 2010s, which found expression in the endeavor to establish National
Research Data Infrastructures (→Further reading: Infrastructure programs for 3D data).
The new data culture formulated here [32] follows the general desire of academic circles
for digital research data to be findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR)
(→Legislation) [33].
    Parallel to these developments in digital humanities, digital 3D modeling was examined
in the engineering sciences. With the development of computer graphics since the 1960s
and the arrival of powerful PCs in planning offices since the 1990s, efficiency increased
because of improved interoperability and sustainability of digital 3D datasets. Regarding
digital source-based 3D reconstruction, the approaches from architecture and spatial and
urban planning represent interesting points of reference.
    Since the mid-1990s, representatives from the construction industry, with software
companies, have been developing a data exchange format that can store not only the
8.3 What Are We Dealing With                                                            173


geometry but also the object-based properties (property sets) and exchange them between
different disciplines involved in construction. The resulting data exchange format, Industry
Foundation Classes (IFC), form the common language of those involved in construction
and introduce a new planning methodology that began in the 1970s and became known as
Building Information Modeling (BIM) in the early 2000s [34]. The methodology is based
on the communication of the parties involved by means of discipline-related 3D models
(architectural design, construction engineering, MEP engineering, etc.), which are feder-
ated in a coordination model, as the Single Source of Truth. The IFC ensures a low-loss
flow of information in the process and the information is mapped in the object-oriented
3D model, which has a different Level of Geometry, and Level of Information as well as
accompanying documents (2D plans, photos, drawings, audio-/video-files, etc.) linked to
it, depending on the required Level of Information Need. The increase in efficiency is thus
based on an internationally recognized standard according to which projects are structured
and BIM Execution Plans designed in response to Exchange Information Requirements
[35].
    In the early 2000s, a similar effort began in spatial and urban planning. As a result,
an xml-based application schema for storing and exchanging digital 3D city models was
introduced. City Geography Markup Language [36] enables digital 3D city models to be
enriched with additional information that is of crucial importance for sustainable urban
planning and administration of large scale build environment.


8.3      What Are We Dealing With

8.3.1    Model Types, Methods, and Data Formats

Digital 3D reconstruction deals with a wide variety of data that pose a particular challenge
in terms of documentation. If we start from the 3D models, different types of models and
modelling methods entail different properties [37]. The common subdivision introduces
three types of models: wireframe, surface, and solid. The wireframe model is mainly
used today for visualization purposes. Thus, the surface and solid models are the actual
model types, which are essentially based on two different modeling methods. While the
surface model consists of several independent surfaces that are not assigned to a concrete
object, the solid model is a closed body that represents an object.
    In terms of methods, object-based 3D modeling software solutions use Construc-
tive Solid Geometry (CSG), which depicts completed solid models of the objects.
This modeling methodology is preferred in industrial design, machinery, and construc-
tion (architecture and civil engineering, especially in BIM-supporting applications). The
surface models that favor free-form modeling are used in animated films, product and
architectural visualization, and urban planning. The associated modeling methodology is
called Boundary Representation (B-Rep).
174                                                                      8 Documentation


   The manifold data formats for 3D datasets pose a further challenge. With regard
to documentation, especially interoperability and thus the sustainability of data formats, a
distinction is made between proprietary 3D model formats (e.g. C4D for Maxon Cinema
4D or 3DS for Autodesk 3D Studio Max) which are specific to software in which they
were created, and data exchange formats (e.g., OBJ, DAE, STL, FBX, IFC, CityGML,
X3D, and gITF), which are widely used and supported by many software applications
[38]. The construction industry and urban planning use specific standards that integrate
both the geometric information and the meaning of the objects or the surfaces that define
them, such as IFC for BIM (ISO 16739–1:2018) or CityGML [39]. For web-based visu-
alization of the 3D models, formats such as X3D and gITF were designed, which enable
high-performance interactive display [40], but present challenges when converting the
digital models from proprietary formats.
   Finally, two trends should be briefly mentioned. First, standardization of methods
and types of models, such as CSG/BIM and B-Rep/CityGML, can technically guarantee a
documentation link and interoperability, are developing further and further, also regarding
the graphic appearance. Second, increasing differentiation of the creation process for
quasi-photorealistic reconstructions, e.g., immersive virtual reality simulations. A wide
variety of software types are used, each of which fulfills specific functions to create
geometries and represent textures, vegetation, or lighting conditions in generative models.
However, the generative approach is not based on storing the resulting 3D geometries
but on parameters and generates a 3D object in real time [41, 42]. In result storing 3D
information in a state is not possible. With such modeling methods and creation processes,
annotation of documentation directly on the 3D model is rather more difficult and storage
in non-proprietary file formats may be impossible [43].
   The question of a common language, the lowest common denominator of digital
3D models, may arise here. Agreement on a modeling, documentation, and publication
method could guarantee the FAIR use of 3D models as serious 3D in archaeology, art
and architectural history. Further considerations in this regard can be based on the con-
cept of the Digital Critical Model [44], and the Scientific Reference Model [45, 51] (→
Scholarly Method).


8.3.2    Intellectual Argumentation

The documentation of decision-making processes is about recording trains of thought,
interpretations of sources, and the considerations derived from them. Intellectual argu-
mentation is supposed to explain—based on selected sources and analogies—why the
reconstruction turned out the way it did, and which other possibilities were considered
or discarded. If documentation exists at all, it is usually not in interoperable form. The
situation is very inconsistent: apart from a few project descriptions online or in printed
publications, documentation tends to exist internally, if at all. The spectrum ranges from
8.4 What Needs to be Documented                                                             175


handwritten records and/or the collection of sources used in file folders to embedding in
complex internal communication tools that are based on commercial software and then
developed by the users. Publishing/networking the data in this internal form is rather
undesirable and seems technically difficult.4
   In addition, some projects map decision-making processes with online databases and
may link sources and considerations to 2D images of the reconstructions, or annotate
them on the 3D models, and try to establish further references using Linked (Open) Data
technologies. In almost all cases these are pilot projects that take up larger resources and
have not yet been put to widespread use.


8.4       What Needs to be Documented

Documentation concerns the information about the created dataset and the decision-
making processes involved in the reconstruction accompanied by object (physical and
digital) related data. The information about a dataset is called metadata (data about
data). From the long experience of recording objects, e.g., in a museum context, two main
types exist: descriptive and administrative metadata. The essential data that is collected
during documentation is known as the core dataset. Since 2006, the digital visualiza-
tion of cultural heritage has included paradata [4]. By paradata, we mean the collection
of information describing the process of creating the 3D model and the associated 3D
visualization. First and foremost, it is the recording and documentation of the creative
interpretation process that distinguishes the source-based 3D reconstructions from a retro-
digitization of existing objects by terrestrial laser scanning or photogrammetry [46]. Here,
the sources used, the gaps in knowledge uncovered, and the interpretation of the result
are to be documented.


8.4.1     Documentation of the 3D Models: Metadata

The descriptive metadata describes the digital 3D model and the represented physical
object. Usually, the name of the object, its function or type, its origin, its classification in
an architectural epoch, the persons and events associated with it, etc. are mentioned.
   The technical metadata related to the digital 3D model can include information on file
size, file format, number of faces, edges, and nodes, model type, modeling methodology,
software used, etc. This type of data can be partly mapped automatically during web-based
3D visualization.


4 The assessment is based on unpublished qualitative interviews conducted in the DFG project
IDOVIR with people who create digital reconstructions, from larger production companies to self-
employed individuals.
176                                                                               8 Documentation


   The administrative metadata regulates the legal aspects of the object, in this case the
digital 3D model. They name the author (creator) and possibly the persons involved, the
persons and/or institutions as rights holders, and the license under which the 3D model
can be used. They are the basic prerequisite for legally secure access to the 3D model
and its future use.
   As part of the development of infrastructure projects, core datasets for the documenta-
tion of 3D models, including digital-source-based 3D reconstruction, are currently being
discussed and developed.5 The documentation schema presented here represents the com-
parison between IDOVIR and DFG 3D-Viewer and represents the status of the discussion
from June 2022 (Fig. 8.2).
   When capturing the digital 3D model, the data types can be classified according to the
following pattern. The description of the dataset should contain the basic, mostly field-
based information about the digital 3D model. Usually, this is the model’s name, the time
period the model represents, and a free-text description of the model.
   A central part of the documentation is the rights declaration, which clarifies the use of
the model and should ideally be available under Creative Commons licenses. It con-
tains field-based entries on the license, the author (creator), and other rights holders
(e.g. legal bodies). It is important to refer to common international standards and norms
regarding licenses (→ Legislation), persons, and entities (ORCID,6 GND,7 VIAF,8 etc.).
In this way, ambiguities regarding machine information processing can be avoided and
the datasets can be linked. To document the history of the model more comprehensively,
the software used, the modeling method, other people involved, and time span of the 3D
modeling can be recorded. Information on the physical (no longer existing) object is doc-
umented, which further contextualizes the model. Here, in addition to listing alternative
names for the object, the object type can be defined following controlled vocabularies, and
a link given to the Wikipedia and Wikidata datasets. Historical relationships to persons
with a role and to historical events can ensure further contextualization of the object. The
location of the object in relation to norm data, such as Geonames, should enable clear
georeferencing of the object in question.
   Finally, the project under which the 3D model was created can be documented within
a project description. Here, it is useful to include the project title, possibly its acronyms,
the website, the purpose, and the result as well as a free-text description of the project and

5 The mapping of metadata started in 2022 as a workshop series and included the DFG projects
DFG 3D-Viewer (https://dfg-viewer.de, accessed on 1.2.2023.) and IDOVIR (https://idovir.com/,
accessed on 1.2.2023), the specialist information serviceBAUdigital (https://fid-bau.de, accessed on
1.2.2023), Baureka (https://baureka.de, accessed on 1.2.2023) and national and European efforts
such as the German Research Data Infrastructure, particularlyNFDI4Culture and the Europeana
(https://europeana.eu, accessed on 1.2.2023). It has been extended to further international infrastruc-
tures since then.
6 https://orcid.org/, accessed on 1.2.2023.
7 https://www.dnb.de/, accessed on 1.2.2023.
8 https://viaf.org/, accessed on 1.2.2023.
8.4 What Needs to be Documented                                                         177




Fig. 8.2 Miro board documentation scheme for alignment of core datasets between IDOVIR
and DFG 3D Viewer (Image: AI MAINZ, 2022)


the project duration including the institutions involved in the project and their respective
roles (Fig. 8.3).
178                                                                      8 Documentation




Fig. 8.3 Documentation of the 3D reconstruction of the wooden synagogue in Volpa in the 3D
repository developed in the DFG 3D-Viewer project. (Image: AI MAINZ, 2022)


8.4.2    Documentation of the Decision-Making Processes: Paradata

When documenting the decision-making processes, the intellectual argumentation
behind them is central. It must be explained which sources, analogies, and considera-
tions led to the reconstruction (Fig. 8.4). These explanations should be visually juxtaposed
with the presented sub-area of a reconstruction in manageable spatial divisions (e.g., north
façade, east façade, etc.) to enable immediate reference and comparison. The reconstruc-
tion can be visualized in a 2D image of the reconstruction model or by means of an
8.5   How to Document                                                                      179




Fig. 8.4 IDOVIR: documentation of the reconstruction of Altenberg Monastery (Image: IDOVIR,
2022)


annotation and a pre-set perspective on the 3D model. Both have different constraints and
advantages. The 2D image does not require much effort to create. The representation of
the 3D model may mean saving in a format suitable for the web, which may lead to a
loss of representation or high effort but allows a good spatial clarification of the situation.
   Furthermore, it makes sense to describe the variants considered and excluded in order
to secure the knowledge stored in them and make it visible and, as described in the
previous section, to include the metadata.
   It could also be helpful to show the degree of uncertainty. Interesting work at the
University of Bologna (→ Visualization) should be mentioned here [44], which is devel-
oping proposals on how the degree of uncertainty and sources used could be visualized
on the 3D model or its representation.


8.5       How to Document

Once it has been decided what is to be documented, there is the legitimate question of how
to do so. This technical methodological aspect has so far been disregarded in the relevant
guidelines and directives, not least due to the lack of research data infrastructures. As a
result, 3D datasets could not be documented on a significant scale. New technological
solutions were presented in the above section on preliminary work.
   With funding from the German Research Foundation (DFG) and efforts from the Ger-
man Research Data Infrastructures (NFDI), technological services are currently being
developed and made available in the short term to enable the documentation and publi-
cation of research data, including 3D models, while adhering to the FAIR Principles and
applying Linked Data technologies.
180                                                                            8 Documentation


   In analogy to Tim Berners Lee’s 5 Star Model for Open Data, the technical solutions
for documenting 3D models within the 3D repositories are also described here in stages
(Fig. 8.5).
   ★ Provide your 3D model and the associated metadata on the web under an Open
License (OL). The format does not matter (scanned sheet, PDF, etc.)
   ★★ Provide your 3D model in a format supporting Model Structure (MS) and the
associated metadata on the web in a structured format (e.g. Excel instead of a scanned
sheet, image or PDF)
   ★★★ Provide your 3D model in Neutral Format (NF) and use open, non-proprietary
formats (e.g. CSV instead of Excel) for the associated metadata on the web
   ★★★★ Provide your 3D model with Structural Elements Properties (SEP) and use
URIs to label things so that your data can be linked to




Fig. 8.5 Assessment schema for 3D formats in terms of their interoperability, based on the criteria
of the 5-star deployment schema presented by Tim Berners-Lee in 2012 (Image: AI MAINZ/Igor
Bajena, 2023)
8.5     How to Document                                                                   181


    ★★★★★ Provide your 3D model as Linked Open Model (LOM) and link your data
with other data to create contexts (Linked Open Data).
    This technical networked semantic documentation of 3D models (metadata) in
3D repositories is followed by documentation of the creative processes behind the visual
representation (paradata). The striking feature of this context is the focus on recording
the individual decision in a source-based reconstruction of art and architectural objects
that no longer exist. Depending on the scientific questions of the research projects, what
is to be documented may vary. Regarding standardization, jointly developed core datasets
are of fundamental importance. The comprehensive documentation of decisions in a
reconstruction process can also make use of the stage-like representation described above.
The main difference here is that the 3D model does not necessarily have to be provided,
as in the case of 3D repositories on the web.
    Finally, it is important in the “how to document” that the hurdles are kept as low as pos-
sible e.g.: A cost-free infrastructure that can perhaps already be used as a communication
platform during reconstruction. A minimal training time and as little additional effort as
possible. Securing the data through renowned, experienced institutions such as libraries,
can build trust. The core task remains to reveal the knowledge behind the reconstruc-
tion, whether in 2D or 3D. Ultimately, any form of documentation—publicly accessible
or not—is better than no documentation at all.


      Summary
      After reading this chapter you should understand why it is important to document
      meta- and paradata of digital 3D reconstructions, what and how to document, and
      how to document projects with existing online tools.
      Standards and guidelines

      • UNESCO Charter (2003) Charter on the preservation of the digital heritage, pub-
        lished 2009 (https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000179529, accessed on
        1.2.2023).
      • DFG Guidelines for Safeguarding Good Scientific Practice (2019), https://www.
        dfg.de/download/pdf/foerderung/rechtliche_rahmenbedingungen/gute_wissens
        chaftliche_praxis/kodex_gwp.pdf, accessed on 1.2.2023; https://www.dfg.de/dow
        nload/pdf/foerderung/rechtliche_rahmenbedingungen/gute_wissenschaftliche_p
        raxis/kodex_gwp_en.pdf, accessed on 1.2.2023.
      • DFG Code of Practice “Digitization” (2016) https://www.dfg.de/formulare/12_
        151/, accessed on 1.2.2023.
      • London Charter, Denard H (2012) A new introduction to the London charter. In:
        Bentkowska-Kafel A et al (eds) Paradata and transparency in virtual heritage.
182                                                                      8 Documentation



    Ashgate, Burlington, pp 57–72. https://www.londoncharter.org/fileadmin/templa
    tes/main/docs/london_charter_2_1_de.pdf, accessed on 1.2.2023.
  • Principles of Seville. International Principles of Virtual Archaeology. Ratified by
    the 19th ICOMOS General Assembly in New Delhi, December 2017 (http://sev
    illeprinciples.com, accessed on 1.2.2023).
  • FAIR Principles, Wilkinson et al (2016) The FAIR guiding principles for scien-
    tific data management and stewardship. Scientific Data 3(1):160,018. https://doi.
    org/10.1038/SDATA.2016.18.


  Projects

  • DFG 3D-Viewer (2021–2023). The development of a 3D viewer infrastructure
    for historical 3D reconstructions is intended to provide permanent publishing
    and archiving of 3D datasets and the associated metadata, and to enable collabo-
    ration and expert discourse on digital 3D models. The overall goal of the project
    is to develop a web-based 3D viewer and exchange format for distributed 3D
    repositories that ensure findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable 3D mod-
    els as research data. Subgoals include creating an interdisciplinary application
    profile, including the assignment of rights (licensing of models) and develop-
    ing a prototype 3D repository and workflow for delivering a 3D model into 3D
    repositories. https://dfg-viewer.de/en/dfg-3d-viewer, accessed on 1.2.2023.
  • DFG Project IDOVIR: Infrastructure for the documentation of virtual recon-
    structions (2022–2024). The aim of IDOVIR is to make decision-making
    processes in architectural reconstruction permanently traceable and openly acces-
    sible online with embedding at the University and State Library Darmstadt. The
    core is the presentation of the intellectual argumentation behind a reconstruc-
    tion. Special attention is paid to the ability to present any number of variants
    or working states. Other features of the research infrastructure, which can be
    used free of charge, include low-threshold use (familiarization time 15 min),
    guided data entry, automatic PDF generation of the documentation, visualization
    via 2D renderings and an interactive 3D model, and various tools for evalua-
    tion, measurement, and communication. Depending on the available resources, it
    allows minimal or extensive documentation. IDOVIR also developed a proposal
    on how to depict the degree of uncertainty (plausibility) of the reconstruction
    and the sources used. https://idovir.com/, accessed on 1.2.2023.
  • Semantic Kompakkt: A tool for the semantic annotation of 3D models, devel-
    oped within NFDI4Culture (2020–2025). The open-source components Wikibase
    (indexing, knowledge graph), Open Refine (data transformation and import) and
    Kompakkt (storage, visualization, interaction) will be integrated. Initially, for the
8.5     How to Document                                                                    183



         use case of cultural heritage and its specific vocabularies and ontologies such as
         CIDOC CRM, this enables the annotation of 3D data within an open and flexible
         knowledge graph environment. This facilitates the linking of 3D models, anno-
         tations, and their cultural context with the semantic web and with national and
         international standards data. Semantic Kompakkt is designed as a collaborative
         environment with different levels of read/write access, where research groups can
         use graphical user interfaces to upload and annotate data with a clear provenance
         and metadata.
             https://gitlab.com/nfdi4culture/ta1-data-enrichment/kompakkt-docker,
         accessed on 1.2.2023.

      Key literature

      • Grellert, M., Pfarr-Harfst, M., 2019. The Reconstruction Argument Method—
        Minimum Documentation Standard in the Context of Digital Reconstruction.
        In: Kuroczyński, P., Pfarr-Harfst, M., Münster, S. (eds.), Der Modelle Tugend
        2.0: Digitale 3D-Rekonstruktion als virtueller Raum der architekturhistorischen
        Forschung, arthistoricum.net, Heidelberg, pp. 264–280 [47].
      • Wacker, M., Bruschke, J., 2019. Documentation of digital reconstruction projects.
        In: Kuroczyński, P., Pfarr-Harfst, M., Münster, S. (eds.), Der Modelle Tugend
        2.0: Digitale 3D-Rekonstruktion als virtueller Raum der architekturhistorischen
        Forschung, arthistoricum.net, Heidelberg, pp. 282–294 [48].
      • Apollonio, F.I., 2016. Classification Schemes for Visualization of Uncertainty
        in Digital Hypothetical Reconstruction. In: Münster, S., Pfarr-Harfst, M.,
        Kuroczyński, P., Ioannides, M. (eds.), 3D Research Challenges in Cultural
        Heritage II: How to Manage Data and Knowledge Related to Interpretative Dig-
        ital 3D Reconstructions of Cultural Heritage, Springer International Publishing,
        Cham, pp. 173–197 [25].
      • Kuroczyński P., Bajena I.P., Große P., Jara K., Wn˛ek K., 2021. Digital Recon-
        struction of the New Synagogue in Breslau: New Approaches to Object-Oriented
        Research. In: Niebling F., Münster S., Messemer H. (eds.): Research and
        Education in Urban History in the Age of Digital Libraries. UHDL 2019. Com-
        munications in Computer and Information Science, vol 1501. Springer, Cham,
        pp. 25–45 [49].
      • Apollonio F.I., Fallavollita F., Foschi R., 2021. The Critical Digital Model for the
        Study of Unbuilt Architecture, in: F. Niebling et al. (Eds.): UHDL 2019, CCIS
        1501, pp. 3–24 [50].
      • Kuroczyński P., Apollonio F.I., Bajena I., Cazzaro I., 2023. Scientific Refer-
        ence Model – Defining standards, methodology and implementation of serious
        3D models in archaeology, art and architecture history, in: The International
184                                                                             8 Documentation



     Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information
     Sciences, Volume XLVIII-M-2 – 2023, pp. 895–902 [51].
   • Bajena I.P., Kuroczyński P., 2023. Development of the Methodology and Infras-
     tructure for digital 3D Reconstructions, in: Proceedings of (IN)TANGIBLE
     HERITAGE(S) A conference on technology, culture and design, Canterbury
     2022, AMPS conference proceedings series, ISSN 2398–9467, pp. 72–83 [45].




References

 1. Brink A (2013) Anfertigung wissenschaftlicher Arbeiten S, S. 3–4. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
    3-658-02511-3
 2. German Research Foundation (2023) „Guidelines for Safeguarding Good Research Practice.
    Code of Conduct”, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3923601.
 3. Münster S (2011) Entstehungs- und Verwendungskontexte von 3D-CAD-Modellen in den
    Geschichtswissenschaften. In: Meissner K et al (eds) Virtual enterprises, communities & social
    networks. TUDpress, Dresden, pp 99–108
 4. Denard H (2012) A new introduction to the London charter. In: Bentkowska-Kafel A et al (eds)
    Paradata and transparency in virtual heritage. Ashgate, Burlington, pp 57–72
 5. Principles of Seville. International principles of virtual archaeology. Ratified by the 19th ICO-
    MOS general assempbly in New Delhi DHSC
 6. London Charter, Denard H (2012) A new introduction to the London charter. In: Bentkowska-
    Kafel A et al (eds) Paradata and transparency in virtual heritage. Ashgate, Burlington, pp 57–
    72. https://www.londoncharter.org/fileadmin/templates/main/docs/london_charter_2_1_de.pdf,
    accessed on 1.2.2023.
 7. Kuroczyński P et al (eds) (2019) Der Modelle Tugend 2.0: Digitale 3D-Rekonstruktion als
    virtueller Raum der architekturhistorischen Forschung. arthistoricum.net, Heidelberg
 8. Arnold D et al (2008) EPOCH research agenda – final report
 9. Demetrescu E et al (2017) A white-box framework to oversee archaeological virtual reconstruc-
    tions in space and time: Methods and tools. J Archaeol Sci: Rep 14:500–514
10. Pletinckx D (2012) In: (2012) How to make sustainable visualizations of the past: an EPOCH
    common infrastructure tool for interpretation management. In: Bentkowska-Kafel A et al (eds)
    Paradata and transparency in virtual heritage. Ashgate Publishing, Farnham, pp 203–244
11. Doerr M (2003) The CIDOC CRM – an ontological approach to semantic interoperability of
    metadata. AI Mag 24(3)
12. Doerr M et al (2011) CRMdig: a generic digital provenance model for scientific observation.
    In: Proceedings of TaPP’11: 3rd USENIX workshop on the theory and practice of provenance,
    Heraklion
13. Kuroczyński P et al (2016) 3D models on triple paths – new pathways for documenting and
    visualising virtual reconstructions. In: Münster S et al (eds) 3D research challenges in cultural
    heritage II. Springer LNCS, Cham, pp 149–172
14. Kuroczyński P, Große P (2020) OntSciDoc3D—Ontology for Scientific Documentation of
    source-based 3D reconstruction of architecture. In: Long Abstracts of the International Confer-
    ence on Cultural Heritage and New Technologies, Vienna, (https://chnt.at/wp-content/uploads/
    OntSciDoc3D--Ontology-for-Scientific-Documentation-of-source-based-3D-reconstruction-of-
    architecture.pdf)
References                                                                                       185


15. Bruschke J, Wacker M (2018) DokuVis – ein Dokumentationssystem für digitale Rekonstruk-
    tionen. In: Breitling S, Giese J (eds) Bauforschung in der Denkmalpflege – Qualitätsstandards
    und Wissensdistribution. University of Bamberg Press, Bamberg, pp 213–218
16. Pfarr-Harfst M (2010) Dokumentations system für Digitale Rekonstruktionen am Beispiel der
    Grabanlage Zhaoling, Provinz Saanxi, China. Dissertation
17. Pfarr-Harfst M et al (2016) The reconstruction – argumentation method. In: Digital heritage.
    Progress in cultural heritage: documentation, preservation, and protection. Lecture notes in
    computer science, pp 39–49
18. Grellert M, Pfarr-Harfst M, Schmid J (2019) Documentation for virtual reconstructions. One
    year R-A-M – reconstruction-argumentation-method – a report of first experiences. In: Proceed-
    ings of the 22nd international conference on cultural heritage and new technologies. CHNT 22,
    2017, Wien
19. Kuroczyński P et al (2021) Digital reconstruction of the new Synagogue in Breslau: New
    approaches to object-oriented research. In: Research and education in urban history in the age
    of digital libraries. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 25–45
20. Kuroczyński P et al (2019) Historic Building Information Modeling (hBIM) und Linked Data –
    Neue Zugänge zum Forschungsgegenstand objektorientierter Fächer. In: Sahle P (ed) DHd
    2019. Digital humanities: multimedial & multimodal. Konferenzabstracts. Universitäten zu
    Mainz und Frankfurt, Mainz, pp 138–141
21. Martens B (2019) Virtuelle Rekonstruktion: Building Information Modelling (BIM) als
    Rahmenbedingung für eine langfristige Nutzung von digitalen 3D-Gebäudemodellen. In:
    Kuroczyński P et al (eds) Der Modelle Tugend 2.0: Digitale 3D-Rekonstruktion als virtueller
    Raum der architekturhistorischen Forschung. Heidelberg University Press, Heidelberg
22. Demetrescu E (2015) Archaeological stratigraphy as a formal language for virtual reconstruc-
    tion. Theory and practice. J Archaeol Sci 57:42–55
23. Hauck O et al (2014) Cultural heritage markup language – how to record and preserve 3D
    assets of digital reconstruction. In: CHNT 19, Vienna. http://chml.foundation/wp-content/upl
    oads/2015/06/CHNT19_Hauck_Kuroczynski.pdf. 09 July 2015
24. Niccolucci F et al (2006) A fuzzy logic approach to reliability in archaeological virtual recon-
    struction. In: Niccolucci F et al (eds) Beyond the artifact. Digital interpretation of the past.
    Budapest
25. Apollonio FI (2016) Classification schemes for visualization of uncertainty in digital hypotheti-
    cal reconstruction. In: Münster S et al (eds) 3D Research challenges in cultural heritage II: how
    to manage data and knowledge related to interpretative digital 3D reconstructions of cultural
    heritage. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 173–197
26. Kensek KM et al (2004) Fantastic reconstructions or reconstructions of the fantastic? Track-
    ing and presenting ambiguity, alternatives, and documentation in virtual worlds. Autom Constr
    13(2):175–186. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2003.09.010
27. Michl F (2018) Digitale Bilder—analoges Recht: Von den Untiefen des Bildrechts. In:
    Kuroczyński P, Bell P, Dieckmann L (eds) Computing Art Reader: Einführung in die digitale
    Kunstgeschichte. arthistoricum.net (Computing in Art and Architecture, Band 1), Heidelberg,
    pp 254–264
28. Lutz Heusinger (1983) Kunstgeschichte und EDV: 8 Thesen. In: Bd. 11 Nr. 4, Kritische
    Berichte. https://doi.org/10.11588/kb.1983.4.9808. https://journals.ub.uni-heidelberg.de/index.
    php/kb/article/view/9808/3674)
29. Laupichler F (1998) MIDAS, HIDA, DISKUS - was ist das? AKMB news 4
30. Berners-Lee T et al (2001) The semantic web. J Sci Am 284(5):34–43
186                                                                            8 Documentation


31. Doerr M, Bruseker G, Bekiari C, Ore CE, Belios T, Stead S (2020) Volume A: definition of
    the CIDOC conceptual reference model. Version 6.2.9. ICOM/CIDOC documentation stan-
    dards group, continued by the CRM special interest group. http://www.cidoc-crm.org/Version/
    version-6.2.9
32. RfII Recommendations “Performance through Diversity”—May 2016, pp 46. https://d-nb.info/
    1121685978/34
33. Wilkinson et al (2016) The FAIR guiding principles for scientific data management and stew-
    ardship. Scientific Data 3
34. Eastman CM (1975) The use of computers instead of drawings in building design. In: AIA
    Journal 63:46–50
35. See UK BIM Framework setting out the approach for implementing BIM in the UK using the
    framework for managing information provided by the ISO 19650 series. https://www.ukbimf
    ramework.org/standards/
36. Ohori KA et al (2018): Modeling cities and landscapes in 3D with CityGML. In: Building
    information modeling. Springer, pp 199–215. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-92862-3_1
37. Roubanov D (2014) Mechanikkonstruktion (M-CAD),. In: Eigner M et al (eds) Modellbasierte
    virtuelle Produktentwicklung. Springer Vieweg, pp 115–136
38. Fernie K et al (2020) 3D content in Europeana task force. https://pro.europeana.eu/post/3d-con
    tent-in-europeana-task-force-review
39. OGC (2012) OGC City Geography Markup Language (CityGML) Encoding Standard, Version
    2.0.0
40. Cieslik E (2020) 3D digitization in cultural heritage institutions guidebook
41. Havemann S et al (2004) Generative parametric design of gothic window tracery. VAST 2004:
    the 5th international symposium on virtual reality, archaeology and cultural heritage
42. S. Garagnani et al (2013) parametric accuracy: building information modeling process applied
    to the cultural heritage preservation. In: 3DARCH 2013
43. Rossenova L, Schubert Z, Vock R, Sohmen L, Günther L, Duchesne P, Blümel I (2022) Collab-
    orative annotation and semantic enrichment of 3D media: a FOSS toolchain. In: Proceedings of
    the 22nd ACM/IEEE joint conference on digital libraries (JCDL ‘22). Association for Comput-
    ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 40, pp 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1145/3529372.353
    3289
44. Apollonio FI et al (2021) The critical digital model for the study of unbuilt architecture. In:
    Research and education in urban history in the age of digital libraries. Springer International
    Publishing, Cham, pp 3–24
45. Bajena IP, Kuroczyński P (2023) Development of the Methodology and Infrastructure for dig-
    ital 3D Reconstructions. In: Proceedings of (IN)TANGIBLE HERITAGE(S) A conference on
    technology, culture and design, Canterbury 2022, AMPS conference proceedings series, ISSN
    2398–9467, pp 72–83
46. DFG (2016) DFG-Praxisregeln “Digitalisierung”
47. Grellert M et al (2019) Die Rekonstruktion – Argument – Methode: Vorschlag für einen mini-
    malen Dokumentationsstandard im Kontext digitaler Rekonstruktionen. In: Kuroczyński P et al
    (eds) Der Modelle Tugend 2.0: Digitale 3D-Rekonstruktion als virtueller Raum der architek-
    turhistorischen Forschung. Heidelberg
48. Wacker M et al (2019) Documentation of digital reconstruction projects. In: Kuroczyński P et al
    (eds) Der Modelle Tugend 2.0: Digitale 3D-Rekonstruktion als virtueller Raum der architek-
    turhistorischen Forschung. Heidelberg, pp 282–294
49. Kuroczyński P et al (2021) Digital reconstruction of the new Synagogue in Breslau: new
    approaches to object-oriented research. In: Niebling F et al (eds) Research and education in
    urban history in the age of digital libraries. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 25–45
References                                                                                     187


50. Apollonio FI et al (2021) The critical digital model for the study of unbuilt architecture. In:
    Niebling F et al (eds) Research and education in urban history in the age of digital libraries.
    Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 3–24
51. Kuroczyński P, Apollonio FI, Bajena I, Cazzaro I (2023) Scientific Reference Model – Defin-
    ing standards, methodology and implementation of serious 3D models in archaeology, art and
    architecture history, in: The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and
    Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLVIII-M-2 – 2023, pp 895–902
52. Getty (2022) What are controlled vocabularies?




Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropri-
ate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license
and indicate if changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statu-
tory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder.
