Visualization
                                                                                             7



   Abstract

   3D computer-based visualization refers to all those methodologies adopted to produce,
   represent, describe, transmit, and present graphically/visually digital 3D models in a
   way that is perceivable by the human eye. Visualization is one of the core aspects of
   3D reconstruction because it is the most effective medium to synthesize complex data
   in a visual way and makes the results more accessible and comprehensible not only to
   professionals but also to laypersons.




   Guiding questions
   • What is digital visualization?
   • What are the media methods and techniques?
   • How can it be used as a scientific tool?
   • How can it be used to communicate information?
   • What are the potentials/challenges of digital and physical visualization?
   • What technologies present and interact with digital 3D reconstructions?


   Basic terms
   • Texturing
   • Photo-realistic and abstract shading
   • False colors


© The Author(s) 2024                                                                   129
S. Münster et al., Handbook of Digital 3D Reconstruction of Historical Architecture,
Synthesis Lectures on Engineers, Technology, & Society 28,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-43363-4_7
130                                                                         7 Visualization


   •   Perspective and axonometric projection
   •   Interactive, linear, and static visualization
   •   Rapid prototyping
   •   Extended reality.




7.1       From Digits to Visuals

Anything in modern computers is stored as sequences of ones and zeroes, however, binary
code is not practical to be read by humans, so any data of such type needs to be converted
in some other language and displayed on an interface that is easier for humans to read.
Digital 3D models are no exception: to be able to interact with, experience, and present
them, their binary description needs to be processed and output visually, e.g., as RGB
(red, green, blue) values on a display. The visualization is such an important aspect of the
3D model that someone might say that 3D modeling, and 3D visualization are entangled
concepts and one has no reason to exist without the other. In 3D reconstruction of cultural
heritage, it would probably not even be possible to generate the 3D model in the first place
without constant visual feedback on a display. The most popular interfaces used to view
digital 3D models are 2D displays (computer, smartphone, TV screen, projector, etc.).
But in the past few decades, many other technologies are beginning to be considered
valid alternatives: VR, AR, 3D displays, holograms, and so on.
   The use of different interfaces and our needs can radically change the way we perceive,
present, experience, and interact with 3D model. Three main ways to present the 3D
models virtually are listed below:

• Static presentation (single image/static rendering).
• Linear presentation (scripted video/precomputed animation).
• Interactive presentation (real-time exploration/computer games).

   In static presentation, the 3D model is projected in a 2D medium and captured as
in a photograph. These types of pictures are fast to make through modern rendering
engines, but they are limited in terms of interaction/navigation freedom within the 3D
space, because the points of view from which the viewer can experience the 3D model
are predetermined.
7.2     Digital 2D-3D Visualization                                                       131


    In linear presentation, the 3D model is experienced through a pre-arranged tour in
the form of an animated video. Interaction/navigation within the 3D space is limited also
in this case because the observer cannot move freely. However, the level of engagement/
comprehension of the 3D shapes can be higher than in static presentation since the depth
perception is enhanced through motion.
    In interactive presentation, the model can be explored in a self-guided way through a
specifically designed digital 3D environment such as a gaming platform or a web app. This
type of presentation is for sure the most versatile one because the models can be perceived
from every possible point of view. Users need a basic understanding of how to move in the
digital space, usually with gamepads, touch screens, or mice and keyboards. Visualizing
high-resolution models interactively is a much more hardware-demanding task than static
and linear presentations, which can run on any device with a display. 360° panoramas can
be considered a hybrid type because they are made with a static 360° image projected
onto a sphere (or a cube), but they can be experienced through VR headsets or navigated
with mice and keyboards. The limit of the navigation in this kind of panorama is that the
point of view is always in the center of the sphere.
    Visualization can also be useful as an analysis tool to highlight certain formal or super-
ficial aspects. According to Ware, visualization can support research and understanding
in five ways [1, cited from 2, p. V]:

•     It may facilitate the cognition of large amounts of data.
•     It can promote the perception of unanticipated emergent properties.
•     It sometimes highlights problems in data quality.
•     It clarifies the relationships between large- and small-scale features.
•     It helps in the formulation of hypotheses.




7.2         Digital 2D-3D Visualization

Digital 2D-3D visualization is the process of creating graphics and renderings by com-
bining 2D and 3D modeling and rendering software. It is used in many industries and
applications ranging from architecture, film and games industries, engineering and man-
ufacturing, to advertising and fashion. Until the advent and subsequent widespread use
of digital 3D modeling and visualization systems, knowledge relating to the 3D world
was studied, transmitted, and analyzed in physical forms through the projection of the 3D
objects onto 2D media (paper, wooden tables, cloth, etc.) or through the creation of 3D
physical mock-ups (in wood, cardboard, clay, or other materials), usually made by hand
by artists, architects, or engineers.
132                                                                              7 Visualization


Table 7.1 Pros and cons of digital 2D-3D visualization
Pros                                             Cons
• Versatility of use and implementation          • 3D visualizations are always
• Static and dynamic visualizations of the         approximations of the real object
  same model from multiple points of view are • Lacking the tactile feel typical of physical
  fast to produce and update                       maquettes
• Automatic check of interferences and           • Long-term preservation is harder to
  inconsistencies                                  guarantee than for their physical counterparts
• Easy automatic extraction of analytical        • Adequate software and hardware are
  data (surface, volume, etc.)                     needed to experience virtual content which
• Immersive explorations at different scales       makes it sometimes less democratic
• Models can be decontextualized                 • Data loss can occur during file conversion or
• Photo-realistic simulations of nonexisting       exporting
  objects/environments                           • Digital files can corrupt because of software
• Virtual accessibility to locations otherwise     errors, hardware failing, and much rarer
  dangerous, impractical, or impossible to visit   events such as bit flips
• Overlapped models/variants on the same         • Digital 3D models are influenced by the
  virtual location                                 software tolerance, which could produce
• Models can be infinitely duplicated,             numerical errors if not properly handled
  decreasing the risk of short-term data loss    • Photorealistic renderings can be hardly
• Joint and remote work on the same virtual        distinguishable from reality; this can cause
  model                                            misconceptions
• Appending and visualizing external data to • Digital models can be unusable because of
  specific parts of the model                      geometrical errors
• Visualization of the final appearance before
  the object is physically built
• Faster modifications and iterations
• Faster and easier to share and remote
  access


   The creation of 3D physical maquettes (→ Basics and Definitions) was time-
consuming work that usually required a precise and long phase of planning, and each
minimal change to the design required non-trivial effort to update the model. The most
popular way to study, analyze, and present any design was through 2D projections, usu-
ally made by and for specialists who knew the representation codes (format/type of lines,
color, standard direction of view, etc.) and were able to mentally process that information,
and mentally compose the 3D object. Digital 2D-3D visualization has overcome some of
the limitations that have characterized analog physical representation. Nevertheless, there
are positive and negative aspects of this new technology. In Table 7.1, we compare the
pros and cons.
7.3     Aspects of Digital 3D Visualization                                                   133


7.3         Aspects of Digital 3D Visualization

Four aspects contribute to the visualization of 3D models:

•     Formal/geometrical aspects (e.g., digital 3D object, segmentation).
•     Shading aspects (e.g., materials, light, rendering algorithms).
•     Representation aspects and methods (e.g., point of view, camera, projection methods).
•     Media and interfaces (e.g., display, monitor, image, 3D prototype).

   Formal/geometrical aspects concern how the 3D model/scene is made (→ 3D mod-
eling): the spatial relations between the parts; the level of detail; the mathematical
description of surfaces; the scale; the segmentation.
   Shading aspects include the surface appearance (textures, material properties, photo-
realistic vs. abstract shading); the use of light/shadows (position and intensity of lights);
the rendering algorithm (biased or unbiased).
   Representation aspects and methods concern the ways of projecting 3D objects into
a 2D plane (e.g., perspective, axonometric, and double orthogonal projection, etc.), this
includes camera settings, points of view, anamorphisms, and solid perspective.
   Media and interfaces are the technological devices used to visualize 3D models:
2D displays (pixel monitors, projectors, etc.); 3D displays (holographic displays, holo-
grams, 3D stereo displays, etc.); VR/AR headsets; physical 2D drawings, prints, 3D rapid
prototyping (3D printing, laser cutting, CNC milling, etc.).


      Further reading: Degrees of freedom in 3D visualization What are the visual
      properties of 3D/4D visualizations?




         The level of detail (LoD) needs to be appropriate to the purpose [3]. While detailed
      visualizations of historical reconstructions are advantageous for imaginability [4], they
      may distract scholars from their research questions [5] or lead to cognitive overload
      [6].
134                                                                        7 Visualization




     Visual style is often discussed in terms of fit to scholarly recommendations and
  distraction of viewers [7]. Since early 3D/4D reconstructions strived for more immer-
  sive and realistic visualization [8], a current scope comprises a large variety of
  photorealistic and non-photorealistic styles [9–11].




     Different degrees of certainty [12–14] have led to a multitude of visual strategies
  for heritage content [15]. Current approaches can be roughly categorized into enrich-
  ment of representations by explanatory elements [16] and adaptation of representation
  quality, e.g., LoD or visual styling [14, 3, 17–21].




     Scaling has been frequently assessed as an important parameter for perceiving
  architecture [3, 22].
7.3     Aspects of Digital 3D Visualization                                                  135




          Visual acuity is the ability to distinguish details: in contrast to scale, the main
      influencing factor is the distance to a virtual or physical object [23–26].




         Perspective depiction and perception of architecture include the viewer effect of
      different fields of view [27, 28, 26]; e.g., the top-down view is the predominant mode
      for investigating cityscapes [29].




         Lighting is relevant to imagine historical architecture [30]. Specific workflows
      and approaches (based on visual comparisons) are proposed for virtual visualization
      [31–36].




         Color is highly relevant for the perception of historical objects and ranges from
      realistic coloring to scales coding parameters or supporting visual distinction of model
      parts [37, 38]. Accurate reproduction of colors is challenging in both modeling [39,
      40] and reproduction by digital devices [41].


   In a research context visualization methods and technologies have a crucial role
because they graphically synthesize aspects of the research, from critical reasoning via
generating and sharing ideas to dissemination. Visualization choices might enhance the
136                                                                        7 Visualization


communication of the study or strongly mislead or distort the interpretation of the
results.
    For example, it was long known that Greek temples were brightly colored, however,
the public misconception is still that these temples were made with raw white marble.
This misconception is mainly because the ruins that survived the centuries lost their col-
ors and even when these structures were graphically reconstructed through operations of
digital anastylosis, they were often represented with a white color in catalogs, magazines,
pictures, and museum exhibitions.
    The same risk looms over the visualization of any digital 3D reconstruction, thus those
professionals aiming to produce scientifically accurate reconstructions have the responsi-
bility not only to produce an accurate model, while documenting every step of the process,
but also to communicate it clearly, limiting as much as possible any misconception.
Shading and representation play the most important role in this regard.


7.4      Formal/Geometrical Aspects

Quite obviously, among all the elements necessary to produce any rendering of a 3D
scene, the 3D geometrical model is the unavoidable starting point from which each other
aspect derives. Without a 3D shape, there would be no medium to apply materials and
textures into, target to point the camera toward, or obstacle with which the rendering
algorithm could calculate the light bounces. All the aspects related to the generation of
3D geometry are extensively described in this chapter (→ 3D Modelling).


7.5      Shading Aspects

In painting and drawing, the word “shading” is usually used to define the process of
darkening or coloring an illustration. It is fundamental to give an accurate perception
of volume, sense of perspective, and material credibility to the objects. Painters who
master the shading technique have deep knowledge of how our physical world works.
For example, they know where a sphere is darker or lighter according to the direction of
light, that the part of the sphere not exposed directly to the light source can be slightly
lighted thanks to the light bouncing away from a near object, that the reflection of the
light pointed on the sphere is sharp if the sphere is made with glossy material and smooth
if the sphere has a rough material. Shading depends on the shape, the light, and the
materials.
    To be able to produce the same sphere properly shaded digitally, all this knowledge
is not crucial anymore, because the proper calculation of the behavior of light bouncing
on the surfaces is all delegated to the render engine through its sophisticated algorithm.
A nonexpert, who does not know the laws of descriptive geometry well, may not notice
errors in the model or in the automatic calculation of light. The two main types of render
engines on the market nowadays are biased (approximated) and unbiased, (accurate).
The most popular render engines in architecture and gaming have a certain level of bias
7.5   Shading Aspects                                                                       137


because they produce images faster than unbiased engines, as even with a small amount of
approximation/bias, they can be still very close to producing physically plausible results.
A good render artist can compensate for the biases by artistically manipulating the shading
of the scene (adding hidden lights or manually changing the color channel of the surfaces
of the objects to simulate penumbrae color bleeding, bouncing light, etc.), so it is still
possible to get very close to physically plausible results even with biased engines.
   Both biased and unbiased render engines support the applications of synthetically
generated procedural textures and reality-based textures. Since synthetically generated
procedural textures are computer-calculated images as e.g. fractal patterns; reality-based
textures are based on images of material surfaces. This, paired with the ability of the
render engines to produce images with a physically plausible light distribution are the
ingredients of the recipe for photorealistic rendering. Render engines can also produce
non-photorealistic (NPR) images, by applying rules which are not physically based on
the distribution of light and the definition of the properties of the materials.


7.5.1     Photorealistic Shading

A completely textured scene with photorealistic textures (Figs. 7.1 and 7.2) and a
physically plausible distribution of light is the aspiration of most reconstructions in enter-
tainment and exhibition contexts [44, 45]. However, photorealism is sometimes mistrusted
in the academic and scientific context of 3D historical reconstructions [11], not only
because the radiosity of the scene can be approximated by itself due to biases of the ren-
der engines, but most importantly because it is very hard to retrieve enough information
about materials for every object in the scene by direct inference from historical sources.
When information is lacking, subjective interpretations has to compensate, which is one
of the main causes of misinterpretations.




Fig. 7.1 Reconstruction of the water jets of Neptune fountain in Bologna. Photogrammetry + laser
scanning + liquid simulations [42] (Image: Foschi)
138                                                                               7 Visualization




Fig. 7.2 Reconstruction of the market in Piazza delle Erbe in Verona during the Middle Age. Project
presented at Expo 2015 [43] (Image: Foschi)


    Photorealism (physical plausibility) and theatricalization, are often priorities for enter-
tainment applications (documentaries, games, movies, museums, etc.). To achieve that, it
is necessary to precisely define the properties of every material applied to all the sur-
faces so the light can properly bounce on them. This requires a level of knowledge that
is usually very hard (if not impossible) to retrieve by direct sources and thus it is usually
heavily subject to personal interpretations, which is not desirable if the aim is to produce
a scientific reconstruction with minimal subjective additions. Nevertheless, photorealistic
visualizations can drive academic research forward as they can provide insights otherwise
hardly deducible from an abstract visualization.
    Thus, can photorealistic texturing ever be scientifically accurate in the context of digi-
tal 3D historical reconstruction? The reproduced result does not necessarily need to match
the original artifact 100%, as despite the efforts and the abundance of sources, the repro-
duction will always be an approximation of the original. Scientific reproducibility in this
context means that the process is documented so that any other researcher who follows
the same process based on the same sources would end up with the same result. Given
this definition, we can certainly assert that, yes, photorealistic texturing can be scientif-
ically acceptable as far as uncertainties and subjective conjectures are clearly identified
and documented.
    Even if all the conjectures are perfectly documented, and the process complies with the
requirements of the scientific method, the risk of misinterpretation by a casual viewer
facing a photorealistic rendering, heavily based on conjectures, is still high. If there are
no visual clues that some part of the scene or texture might have been completely con-
jectured, this might lead the viewer to think that the scene was exactly like it is pictured.
To avoid ambiguities and misconceptions, in academic context photorealistic texturing
7.5       Shading Aspects                                                                                139


should be used with caution and only when there is a robust documental basis. The
surface appearance uncertainties could be communicated visually, by pairing the photo-
realistic view with another false color view indicating which areas have which level of
uncertainty (→ Documentation).


      Further reading: Scale of uncertainty The scale of uncertainty is a common tool
      often proposed in the context of 3D reconstruction of unbuilt or lost architecture (some
      authors use the terms reliability, plausibility, etc. [19]). These scales help to make each
      hypothetical reconstruction transparent and easier to understand and evaluate. A color
      is assigned to each level of the scale, and each level has a description usually related
      to the type and quality of the sources. The colors are then applied to each element of
      the 3D reconstructed model. This abstract shading gives information about the level
      of uncertainty of each element and the overall model at a single glance.
          Several scales of uncertainties were developed over the years [19]. The scale pre-
      sented in Tables 7.2 and 7.3 was developed to minimize ambiguities and overlapping
      between the different levels: it is based on the presence/absence of preserved/damaged
      sources and their authors [37].

      Table 7.2 Level of uncertainty scale [37]
           Description
      1    Reliable assumption derived from reality-based data (i.e., the full real object or parts of
           it, well-preserved archaeological founds, direct surveys, laser scans)
      2    Reliable conjecture based on clear and accurate direct/primary sources* when the real
           object or parts of it are not available
      3    Conjecture based on stylistic/structural references by the SAME AUTHORS when
           direct/primary sources are available, but unclear/damaged/inconsistent/inaccurate. Or
           logic deduction/selection of a variant derived from inconsistent direct sources
      4    Conjecture based on stylistic/structural references by DIFFERENT AUTHORS when
           direct/primary sources are available, but unclear/damaged/inconsistent/inaccurate
      5    Conjecture based on stylistic/structural references by the SAME AUTHORS when
           direct/primary sources are not available
      6    Conjecture based on stylistic/structural references by DIFFERENT AUTHORS when
           direct/primary sources are not available
      7    Conjecture based on personal knowledge due to missing or unreferenced sources
      \    Not relevant/not considered/left unsolved/missing data and missing conjecture (it does
           not count for the calculation of the average uncertainty)
      * Direct/primary sources: all the sources where the object is directly represented, reported,
      or recorded with any level of accuracy (e.g., drawings, sketches, surveys, pictures, paintings,
      texts, books, coins, medals, reliefs, physical models, sculptures)
140                                                                             7 Visualization



  Table 7.3 Level of uncertainty scale, reliability [37]
          Real       Direct/primary sources         Other sources             Reliability
          object     Clear/         Damaged/        Same         Other
                     consistent     unclear         author/s     author/s
      1   ✓          \              \               \            \            Reality
      2   ✗          ✓              \               \            \            Reliable
                                                                              conjecture
      3   ✗          ✗              ✓               ✓            \            Conjecture
      4   ✗          ✗              ✓               ✗            ✓            Conjecture
      5   ✗          ✗              ✗               ✓            \            Conjecture
      6   ✗          ✗              ✗               ✗            ✓            Conjecture
      7   ✗          ✗              ✗               ✗            ✗            Conjecture
      \   \          \              \               \            \            Abstention
  Legend: ✓ = yes, \ = not relevant, ✗ = no

     This particular scale not only gives clues about the type of sources and their author
  (primary sources by the same author, secondary sources by different authors, etc.),
  but also about their quality (damaged/undamaged, readable/unreadable, consistent/
  inconsistent, etc.), and about the level of reliability of the results of the reconstruction
  based on these sources (reliable/unreliable, conjecture/abstention). Each level of the
  scale was assigned to a recognizable/nominable color and number. These numbers are
  a possible alternative to colors in monochrome and visually accessible publications,
  and can be used to calculate the average global uncertainty of the reconstruction
  (Fig. 7.3). This specific scale was designed with 7 steps (+ one step for abstention)
  that can be reduced to 5 and 3 steps without losing comparability (Fig. 7.4).
7.5     Shading Aspects                                                                              141




      Fig. 7.3 Left: false-color scale to show uncertainties; Right: calculation of the average uncer-
      tainty, Andrea Palladio, Villa Pisani, Bagnolo [37]




      Fig. 7.4 Granularity of the scale of uncertainty [37] (Image: Foschi)




   Can photorealistic texturing ever be free of subjective interpretations? Theoreti-
cally yes, if it is based on strong evidence. In modern render engines, diffuse color
(albedo) of the surface is not the only property that is required to define a proper material;
other properties are needed, such as roughness, glossiness, bump, IOR, and so on. Even
if we find sources where the materials are precisely described textually and graphically
with colored drawings, it is still formally impossible to retrieve only from textual and
graphical sources all the properties that modern 3D render engines require. Not to men-
tion that the color of the drawings is influenced by the intrinsic color of the paper and
142                                                                         7 Visualization


they suffer discoloration or color shifting over time, so even colored documental sources
are not 100% reliable.
   The only plausible way to be able to identify with maximum objectivity the texture
and material properties would be by having a physical sample of the original material. In
architectural hypothetical reconstruction, it is very rare to have such a clear and complete
source.
   It is true that in photorealistic renderings the level of uncertainty is usually higher
compared to abstract rendering, but it is also important to not demonize it. Sometimes,
e.g. to enable visual assessment, definition of photorealistic surface appearance becomes
a crucial aspect of the scope of the reconstruction. In these cases, it becomes even more
important to document clearly the process of texturing as much as it is for the modeling.


7.6      Abstract Shading

When the sources about surface appearance are lacking, the most popular alternative to
photorealistic shading is the application of a neutral mono-material, usually grey or
white, because it is a fast solution and is considered more objective. However, this choice
might cause misconceptions similar to those described above for Greek temples and
does not add any useful information. The white mono-material is part of the more general
method of abstract shading, also called non-photorealistic (NPR) shading, the counter-
part of photorealistic (PR) shading. Abstract shading conveys additional information
through colors and textures.
   One of the most popular ways to convey additional information through abstract shad-
ing is to apply false colors to the elements of the model, organized in scales where each
step is described through textual legends (Fig. 7.5). False colors can be used to express
many different concepts: restorers use red and yellow to indicate which part of the build-
ing was reconstructed or demolished; archaeologists use colors to define the different
palimpsests and ages; lighting designers use scales of color to identify which parts of the
model receive more light radiation; fluid or gas speed in 3D simulations can be described
with a false color scale. In digital reconstruction, one of the most popular uses of false
color scales is to visually communicate eventual variants, the level of uncertainty or the
type of sources used [37] (→ Documentation).
   Another possible alternative abstract texturing technique is the projection of the graph-
ical sources on the 3D model (Figs. 7.6, 7.7 and 7.8) [37]. This method is aimed to enrich
the sources by adding the third dimension, or vice versa to enrich the model through the
projection of its 2D graphical sources onto the 3D surfaces of the model, and it does
not need any legend to be explicit. A similar shading technique which tries to mimic the
graphic style of the sources, but without projecting the sources directly onto the model as
7.6   Abstract Shading                                                                    143




Fig. 7.5 Andrea Palladio, Villa Saraceno. False color scale to show uncertainties [46] (Image:
Apollonio)


textures, is described by Daniela Sirbu [47]: the textures and lights are redesigned entirely
by hand trying to reproduce the same lighting, surface appearance, and atmosphere of the
reference source. This technique might be preferable to projection when the reference
sources are particularly damaged or lacking, or low resolution.
   Borderline techniques lie between photorealistic and abstract. For example, the black
and white view can be close to the photorealistic rendition because it can use textures
from photos and the distribution of light can still be physically plausible, but undeniably
not realistic in a strict sense because the information about the colors was removed. This
solution decreases the level of uncertainty when color information is lacking. Rather than
converting the renderings from colored to black and white as the last step, it is also
possible to convert each texture to black and white before rendering; with this solution,
however, the surfaces would eventually inherit a bit of color from colored light sources.
144                                                                            7 Visualization




Fig. 7.6 Projection of the original drawing on the 3D model by Mauro Guidi, Sepolcro antico di
figura quadrata con portico di due gradini, Cesena Nuova, Atlante 41, Carta 48. Top: 3D CDM;
Bottom: original drawing [37] (Image: Foschi)




Fig. 7.7 Projection of the original source on the 3D model. Claude Nicolas Ledoux, Atelier des
gardes de la forêt, Cité idéale de Chaux, Tome 1, Pl. 102. Top: 3D CMD; Bottom: original drawing
[37] (Image: Foschi)
7.6     Abstract Shading                                                                    145




Fig. 7.8 Projection of the original sources on the 3D model, Art gallery castle Schwerin (Image:
Architectura Virtualis, Darmstadt 2018)

      Other abstract shading techniques (Fig. 7.9) used for various scopes are listed below:

•     Wireframe
•     Ghosted
•     X-ray
•     Cartoon/Comix
•     Silhouette
•     Hand drawn
•     Flat colors
•     Technical drawing
•     Ambient occlusion
•     Water colored
•     Inverted colors
•     Black and white.

   All these techniques, and many others not listed here, are very different from each
other, but share the fact that they do not try to mimic reality. Some of them have only
ornamental and aesthetic uses, while others can be useful for enhancing the readability
of the images, bringing attention to particular details, or showing hidden details. For
example, through wireframe/ghosted/X-ray shading it is possible to look inside the models
without disassembling them, or through flat color shading, it is possible to see the albedo
of the surfaces without the effect of lights and shadows.
   Abstract shading is sometimes used only to characterize some elements in the scene,
while others are photo-realistic textures. This solution can be useful to highlight explicit
elements with known surface appearance (Figs. 7.10, 7.11 and 7.12). Sometimes abstract
shading can also be used as an additional shading style, that accompanies photorealistic
views, to highlight elements in the scene (Fig. 7.13).
146                                                                             7 Visualization




Fig. 7.9 Some abstract shading techniques (Image: Foschi)




Fig. 7.10 Cartoon style + photorealistic textures to indicate different surface appearance uncer-
tainty, Carolingian Church Saint Gall (Image: Architectura Virtualis Darmstadt, 2019)
7.6   Abstract Shading                                                                         147




Fig. 7.11 Reconstruction in ghosted style to show the photo-realistically textured plan underneath,
Plan of Saint Gall (Image: Architectura Virtualis Darmstadt 2019)




Fig. 7.12 Photorealistic texturing + gray monomaterials to indicate surface appearance uncertainty.
Reconstruction of the exhibition organized by Antonio Canova around 1818, Church of Santo Spir-
ito, Bologna [48]
148                                                                                 7 Visualization




Fig. 7.13 Left: bird’s eye view of a cartoon-style shaded reconstruction; Right: the same reconstruc-
tion framed at human height with photorealistic shading, the medieval Jewish quarter in Cologne
(Images: Stadt Köln, Dezernat Kunst und Kultur, VII/3—Archäologische Zone/Jüdisches Museum,
MiQua. LVR-Jüdisches Museum im Archäologischen Quartier Köln and Technischen Universität
Darmstadt, Fachgebiet Digitales Gestalten, 2019)


7.7       Representation Aspects and Methods

Nowadays the traditional methods of representation are used mostly to visualize 3D
models. The visualization of 3D models uses various projections. Most relevant are:

•   Double orthogonal projections (Fig. 7.14)
•   Axonometric projection (Fig. 7.15)
•   Perspective projection (Fig. 7.16)
•   Topographic terrain projection (Fig. 7.17).

These methods start from the classical projection from a center and section (with the
picture plane). We can identify two general cases: conical projection generating perspec-
tives, and parallel projections (where the projection center is a direction) that generate
axonometric projections and double projections. If the projection direction is perpendicu-
lar to the picture plane, we can obtain an orthogonal axonometric projection or a double
orthogonal projection (plan and elevation, or section). If the projection direction is angled
relative to the picture plane, we will obtain an oblique axonometric projection.
   Double orthogonal projections are still used as a starting point to draw the 2D
blueprints used as references for 3D models: plans, sections, and elevations. After building
the 3D model, it is possible to extract an orthogonal view, an axonometry, or a perspec-
tive automatically. These methods of representation/visualization can be differentiated
according to their use/scope. Double projections are used to geometrically and metri-
cally describe the project; for example, the plan is used to control the positioning and
size of spaces, walls, and furniture. Sections and elevations in general are used to design
and communicate height. The axonometric view is used to study the relations between
volumes and spaces. Lastly, the perspective view is used to formally control the percep-
tion of space: if used correctly it is the only method capable of representing the space
viewed from the inside, from the point of view of an imaginary human visitor (placed in
7.7   Representation Aspects and Methods                                                      149




Fig. 7.14 Double orthogonal projection: Villa Pisani Riba by Palladio (Image: Foschi and Fallavol-
lita 2024)




Fig. 7.15 Oblique axonometric projection: Villa Pisani Riba by Palladio (Image: Foschi 2024)
150                                                                             7 Visualization




Fig. 7.16 Perspective projection: Villa Pisani Riba by Palladio (Image: Foschi 2024)




Fig. 7.17 Terrain topographic projection: Contour lines (Image: Foschi 2024)


a measurable point in the digital space). In contrast, double projections and axonometric
projections always have a point of view outside the designed space (since their point of
view is infinitely far).
    There are three types of orthogonal axonometry: trimetric, dimetric, and isometric.
This distinction addresses the three ways to view the three orthogonal Cartesian axes X,
Y, and Z when viewed with a certain angle. The three orthogonal axes shrinking ratio and
orientation are the main focuses of axonometric projection; even its etymology encapsu-
lates these concepts. In digital representation, generating an orthogonal axonometric view
is automated by the software, in fact, almost every 3D modeler or visualization software
integrates the axonometric view as one of the standard visualization modes. Tradition-
ally, the distinction of these three main types of axonometric projections was important to
differentiate which construction to use (usually performed with a ruler and compass), but
in computer programs, it is not important anymore because the visualization is automatic
from any angle and generally, we can choose the best axonometric view based on other
criteria, such as the best angle of view.
7.7   Representation Aspects and Methods                                                151


   In some rendering applications, axonometric views are created upon the activation of
the specific viewport option or through virtual cameras placed inside the scene. However,
some cameras, such as physical cameras, might not have any option to make orthogonal
views, because to be able to generate parallel projections they should be placed infinitely
far from the target, and this would not be acceptable for a simulation of a physical camera.
A workaround that would return a good approximation of an axonometric projection
would be adopting a very narrow field of view or long focal length (500/1000mm or more)
and moving the camera very far away in the direction of the axis of view [49]. With this
expedient, the final projected view would be very similar to an axonometric projection
because the perspective foreshortening would be minimized. Even a professional with a
keen eye would not be able to notice the difference without measuring some distances
with highly accurate tools. This method is also useful to obtain approximations of obliquus
axonometric projections (such as the military axonometry where the plan is in true form)
which are much rarer than standard visualization modes in 3D computer applications.
   For perspective views, it is important to know some principles of descriptive geometry
that help to frame the scene. The first issue is the definition of the viewpoint. As men-
tioned, perspective is the only method capable of framing the space from the inside.
This important quality can be exploited to see the space at human height. Even if the vir-
tual cameras have many options that can be set, the perspective projection only depends
on the viewpoint location. The focal length and the field of view of the virtual cameras
depend on each other and only determine the amount of scene that is captured inside the
frame. Shorter focal lengths and wider field of view capture more space (and vice versa)
but changing these values will not change the perspective projection as far as the point
of view is not moved. Given that, there are a few good practices that one can follow to
capture good architectural views:

• Place the viewpoint at realistic heights (e.g., for views at a human height the average
  height would be 1.5/1.7 m).
• Keep the projections of the vertical lines of the 3D object parallel to the sides of the
  frame (to do so, it is sufficient to keep the camera projection plane perfectly vertical,
  or the camera and its target at the same height). This is not valid for bird’s eye views
  or shots that try to emphasize the height of a building.
• Choose the appropriate picture ratio and field of view of the virtual camera according
  to what we want to include in the shot and according to the formal aspects of the
  content of the shot.

   Virtual cameras are often similar to real cameras; thus, we refer to 35mm cameras.
Focal lengths of 70/100mm are comparable to telephoto lenses, 35/50 mm are considered
standard focal lengths, 18/28 mm are considered wide-angle lenses, and 18mm or less
are considered fisheye lenses. There is no univocal rule to choose the best focal length
in every situation because every architecture is different and can be appreciated with
152                                                                         7 Visualization


different lenses. However, it is preferable to avoid very short focal lengths for framing
historical architecture because apparent deformations (more visible along the perimeter
of the picture) would not allow the viewers to appreciate the spaces properly and would
distort the perception of proportions and shapes [27]. Contemporary architecture might
benefit from the use of wide-angle lenses because the extreme and unconventional spaces
and shapes would be emphasized by these apparent perspective deformations.
   Apparent deformations in the field of visualization can be exploited to make anamor-
phic illusions. An iconic case in the field of architecture is the Church of Sant’Ignazio di
Loyola in Campo Marzio, Rome. This church is well known for the paintings by Andrea
Pozzo (1685) where, if standing from a specific point, the visitors can perceive the illu-
sion of an additional architectural order that breaks through the vault. All the paintings
performed with the technique known as trompe-l’œil are anamorphic illusions.
   Other perspective illusions in the field of architecture can be obtained through the
theory of solid perspective. In the solid perspective, the perspective space is not confined
anymore in the picture plane, as in the previous examples, but it is expanded into another
3D space [49]. Some architects in the past used this technique to produce impressive
perspective illusions, such as Andrea Palladio in the Teatro Olimpico, Vicenza (1580) or
Francesco Borromini in the Galleria Spada, Rome (1652).
   Another practical use of solid perspective in digital reconstruction can be seen in the
study of the error committed by Leonardo da Vinci in his preparatory drawing of the
Adoration of the Magi now housed at the Louvre, Paris [50]. Thanks to digital tools it is
now possible to study the transformation of a shape from the real space to the perspective
space, and vice versa, dynamically [51].


7.8      Media and Interfaces

The most popular media and interfaces to view any digital content comprise any type
of 2D display such as the ones mounted on smartphones, TVs, laptops, desktop PCs,
and so on. Old technologies that are still available but have rapidly fallen into disuse,
such as cathode-based displays, have given way to the newer LCD and LED displays.
These are mostly 2D but can also be 3D, namely, they can reproduce two images at the
same time that can be synchronized to give the illusion of depth through the stereoscopic
view. 3D standard displays usually need secondary optical devices as e.g. polarizing filter
glasses, Other techniques as parallax displays give the perception of depth without the
need for secondary optical devices. Approaches like head tracking or eye tracking try
to improve the visualization depending on the viewer’s position of depth perception or
the level of interactivity at the cost of limiting the number of viewers that can use the
display at the same time. Beside those fixed screen devices there are several technologies
using head mounted displays, which require user devices such as headsets or holographic
glasses. Other recent strands using fixed screens are holographic visualizations, including
7.8   Media and Interfaces                                                               153


volumetric displays of heritage objects [52]. Deviceless approaches include rapid pro-
totyping of manufactured models or printed images, which can be observed by viewers
without specific devices.


7.8.1     Images and Films

Visual media and perception are the main sources of information, communication, and
research on cultural heritage [53–55] and images are still the most frequent output of 3D
modeling projects [56, 57]. Images are used in films and animations [58] or as still images.
Formats and purposes differ greatly between the main target groups: the general public
and domain experts [59]. Visualizations equally serve to represent relations, processes,
and a constructive structure [60]. All these types of outputs are usually presented through
2D, or 3D displays shared digitally (online or offline) or printed on a physical support
(e.g., paper, cardboard, wood).


7.8.2     Extended Reality

In contrast to asynchronous media like images and films, extended realities (XR) pro-
vide a real-time, high level of engagement visualization, which is not constrained to a
single point of view and allows variable levels of interaction between the users and the
virtual content [61]. A wide scope of interactive technologies [62] lies on the continuum
between real and virtual [63] (Fig. 7.18). This ranges from real environments, augmented
realities (AR), and augmented virtuality (AV)—together called mixed reality (MR)—
to virtual reality (VR), or fully computer-generated visual representations. According to
Russo [64], MR can be additive by adding information that does not exist, or subtrac-
tive by hiding or deleting parts of the real world. Layouts for user interaction are highly
dynamic, perspective-dependent, and require a high degree of temporal coherence [65,
66]. So far, the representation of time-independent data has been investigated most and
developed into interaction patterns [67, 68]. Overviews about XR applications in cultural
heritage have been presented in various publications with regard to museums [69, 70] and
virtual tourism [71].


7.8.3     Rapid Prototyping

Rapid prototyping can be a useful visualization medium because it allows direct inter-
action with the model without needing prior knowledge of digital tools, so it is a more
democratic way of presenting 3D objects. Furthermore, compared to a model visualized
on a 3D screen, it helps to better understand the relation between 3D volumes and how
light interacts with them. Lastly, it is less susceptible to digital deprecation, which might
154                                                                                       7 Visualization




        Glass-based virtual reality   Screencast of an augmented reality   Glass less holographic projection


Fig. 7.18 Qualities of extended reality visualizations (Images: Left: Sauer 2019, Middle: Niebling
2019, Right: Münster 2019)


make older digital 3D models to not be accessible in future. However, 3D physical maque-
ttes are susceptible to wearing and can break; are longer to produce, refine, and modify;
and they are not suitable for joint remote working or inspection at different scales.
    A wide range of rapid prototyping techniques is used to create physical representa-
tions of tangible heritage [72] (→ Fig. 7.19). This comprises additive manufacturing
techniques that add layers of material to a 3D structure and subtractive techniques shap-
ing a 3D structure by removing material [73–75, 76]. The used technology highly depends
on the material—e.g., thermic processes such as FDM require materials with a low melt-
ing point, while sintering or milling approaches require specific physical properties of the
material [77]. Another major influencing factor is the scale of reproduction, ranging from
1:1 reproduction at various scales to miniaturizations (e.g., city models) or maximizations
of very small objects. There are three highly relevant technologies for additive manufac-
turing. (1) stereolithography, which builds objects in layers by tracing a laser beam on
the surface of a vat of liquid photopolymer and hardening by UV or thermal process-
ing. (2) laser sintering is based on powders (e.g., metals, polymers, composite materials)
applied in layers and selectively fused or melted at the surface by laser bonding to the
layer below; after removing unprocessed powder, a 3D structure remains. (3) Fused fil-
ament fabrication is application of thermoplastic material in layers, which are heated
and deposited layer by layer [78]. Subtractive approaches comprise computer-controlled
milling tools (CNC machinery), which mill 3D structures out of solid blocks of mate-
rial [79] or laser engraving, which uses a cross laser beam to selectively overheat spots
within solid glass and cause micro-cracks with differing refraction properties [80].
7.8   Media and Interfaces                                                                                      155




      3D printing via fused filament         3D printing via digital light   Manufacturing model of the Pirna
      fabrication: exhibition model of the   processing: The Foundation of   steamship as diecast
      Dresden palace precinct (1678)         Medieval Cities exhibit


Fig. 7.19 Rapid prototyping (Images: Left/Middle: Architectura Virtualis GmbH 2016, Right:
Münster 2009)


7.8.4        Interaction and Motivational Design

The visual appearance, user presentation, and interaction with 3D content are marked by
the level of interactivity and pose various design variables. Specifically for educational
settings, motivational design is of relevance for engaging with users and enabling learning.
    For interaction design, the interaction is classified by the engagement taxonomy devel-
oped by Grissom et al., which differentiates between six degrees of interactivity for visual
output [80]. According to Tullis and Albert, user experience “refers to all aspects of
someone’s interaction with a product, application, or system” [81, p. 15].
    For digital interface design, many interaction parameters are technically determined—
e.g., by the capabilities of VR glasses. Especially, XR applications go well beyond passive
information presentation and enable multiple freedom degrees for interaction design, as
well as user requirements such as avoiding motion-sickness due to continuous move-
ment [82, 83]. With regards to acceptance, the perceived usefulness of applications plays
a major role, which in turn depends on optimal stimuli of representation and interac-
tion [84]. Layouts for user interaction are highly dynamic and perspective-dependent and
require a high degree of temporal coherence [65, 66]. Currently, mainly the representation
of time-independent data has been investigated and developed into interaction patterns [67,
68], since validated strategies for time-dependent 4D data presentation are still missing.
    Especially in cultural institutions and at sites, digital 3D applications are embedded
in physical spaces. There are various recommendations for the design of linked virtual
and physical spaces, e.g., in museums [85, 86] or at heritage sites via location-based 3D
applications [87, 88]. Some recent evolvements comprised multi-user story-based virtual
experiences in physical museums, enriching museum visits with augmented experiences
[89].
    Motivational design involves gamified and playful approaches. According to
Deterding et al., gamification implicates the use of “elements of games that do not give
rise to entire games” [90, p. 2]. Playful design—in contrast to gamification—contains
156                                                                        7 Visualization


no rules or specific goals, and serious games are defined as full-fledged games for non-
entertainment purposes [90]. All three types are intensively used with 3D contexts in
heritage, particularly in educational settings. Examples are:

• Playful design: Examples are Minecraft-like creation games [91] or massive open
  online environments (MUVEs) as 3D social interaction spaces [92].
• Gamification: Applications using gamified elements and strategies to enhance inter-
  action with heritage content [93].
• Serious games: Games either developed for didactic purposes or derived from
  entertainment games [94, 95].

    Storytelling stands for the use of narratives and fictional or non-fictional stories to
present a subject [96]. Psychological [97–99] and educational studies [100] have demon-
strated that narratives can have both a positive motivational effect by making a subject
more alive and engaging to the audience, and a positive learning effect by reducing cog-
nitive load. Storytelling is widely used to digitally present heritage content [101], and
particularly for digital 3D models in humanities in various educational settings [102–106].
Among the multitude of freedom degrees for design (e.g., by fictionality, media, story-
telling modes, or poly-vocationality) [101], general types of scenarios from an educational
perspective are:

• Expositional: Story elements are used in a pre-scripted way to explain specific 3D
  objects. Examples include the presentation of underwater archaeology through stories
  told by an avatar [102].
• Explorative: Open-world games or open-ended platforms encourage dialogic encoun-
  ters where the user has various choices to interact with a dynamic supply of narrative
  contents. Examples include the discovery mode in the game Assassins Creed [107] or
  dynamically scripted heritage experiences [108].
• Constructive or connective approaches: Users can co-create stories and contribute
  story content and share with others. An example is the Jena4D project where users
  contribute location-based personal stories and photographs in a 4D environment [109].



  Summary This chapter deals with the topic of visualizing architectures that have
  never been built or have been lost, including formal, geometrical, shading, and repre-
  sentation aspects, media and interfaces, interaction and motivational design. All the
  concepts are treated in terms of the digital reconstruction of cultural heritage.
7.8     Media and Interfaces                                                              157



      Standards and guidelines

      • Beacham, R.; Denard, H.; Niccolucci, F. An Introduction to the London Charter.
        In Papers from the Joint Event CIPA/VAST/EG/EuroMed Event, Ioannides, M.,
        Arnold, D., Niccolucci, F., Mania, K., Eds.; 2006; pp. 263–269.
      • Denard, H. (2009) The London Charter. For the Computer-Based Visualization
        of Cultural Heritage, Version 2.1. (https://www.londoncharter.org, accessed on
        1.2.2023).
      • Principles of Seville. International Principles of Virtual Archaeology. Ratified by
        the 19th ICOMOS General Assembly in New Delhi, December 2017 (http://sevill
        eprinciples.com, accessed on 1.2.2023).

      Projects

      • The Computer-based Visualization of Architectural Cultural Heritage (CoV-
        Her) project is a European project focused on fixing shared standards at the
        European level for the field of digital 3D reconstruction for heritage, and on the
        dissemination at the high education level for students and scholars.
      • Time Machine is aiming to join Europe’s rich past with up-to-date digital technolo-
        gies and infrastructures, creating a collective digital information system mapping
        the European economic, social, cultural, and geographical evolution across times.
      • The Inception European project realizes innovation in 3D modeling of cultural
        heritage through an inclusive approach for time-dynamic 3D reconstruction of
        artifacts, built and social environments. It enriches the European identity through
        an understanding of how European cultural heritage continuously evolves over long
        periods of time.

      Key literature

      • Migliari R, Fasolo, M. (2022) Prospettiva Teoria. Applicazioni Grafiche e Digitali.
        Hoepli Editore, ISBN 9788836008841 [49].
      • Akenine-Moller, T., Haines, E., Hoffman, N., Pesce, A., Iwanicki, M. and Hillaire,
        S. (2018) Real-Time Rendering, 4th Edition. ISBN-13: 978–1138627000, ISBN-
        10: 1138627003 [110].
      • Pharr, M., Jakob, W. and Humphreys, G. (2016) Physically Based Rendering: From
        Theory to Implementation, 3rd Edition. ISBN: 9780128006450 [111].
158                                                                                 7 Visualization


References

 1. Ware C (2004) Information visualization: perception for design. The Morgan Kaufmann series
    in interactive technologies, vol 22
 2. Frischer B et al (2008) Beyond illustration. 2D and 3D digital technologies as tools for discov-
    ery in archaeology. BAR international series 1805
 3. Glaser M et al (2017) Designing computer-based learning contents: influence of digital zoom
    on attention. Etr&D-Educ Technol Res Dev 65(5):1135–1151
 4. Tversky B (2005) Visuospatial reasoning. In: Holyoak K et al (eds) Handbook of reasoning.
    Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 209–249
 5. Strothotte T et al (1999) Visualizing knowledge about virtual reconstructions of ancient archi-
    tecture
 6. de Boer A et al (2009) Towards a 3D visualization interface for cultural landscapes and heritage
    information. In: Making history interactive, pp 1–10
 7. Favro D (2006) In the eyes of the beholder. Virtual reality re-creations and academia. In:
    Haselberger L et al (eds) Imaging ancient Rome: documentation, visualization, imagination:
    proceedings of the 3rd Williams symposium on classical architecture, Rome, 20–23 May 2004.
    J Roman Archaeol Portsmouth 321–334
 8. Grau O (1999) Die Sehnsucht, im Bild zu sein. Zur Kunstgeschichte der virtuellen Realität
 9. Heeb N et al (2019) Strategien zur Vermittlung von Fakt, Hypothese und Fiktion in der dig-
    italen Architektur-Rekonstruktion. In: Kuroczyński P et al (eds) Der Modelle Tugend 2.0:
    Digitale 3D-Rekonstruktion als virtueller Raum der architekturhistorischen Forschung, Hei-
    delberg
10. Sayeed R et al (2006) State of the art non-photorealistic rendering (NPR) techniques. In:
    McDerby M et al (eds) EG UK theory and practice of computer graphics, pp 1–10
11. Roussou M et al (2003) Photorealism and non-photorealism in virtual heritage representation.
    In: Arnold D et al (eds) VAST2003 4th international symposium on virtual reality, archaeology,
    and intelligent cultural heritage. Eurographics Publications, Aire-La-Ville, pp 51–60
12. Spiegelhalter D et al (2011) Visualizing uncertainty about the future. Science 333(6048):1393–
    1400
13. Pang AT et al (1997) Approaches to uncertainty visualization. Vis Comput 13(8):370–390
14. Wood J et al (2012) Sketchy rendering for information visualization. IEEE Trans Vis Comput
    Graph 18(12):2749–2758
15. Mütterlein J et al (2017) Immersion, presence, interactivity: towards a joint understanding of
    factors influencing virtual reality acceptance and use
16. Dudek I et al (2015) How was this done? An attempt at formalising and memorising a digital
    asset’s making-of. Digit Herit 2:343–346
17. Münster S (2018) Cultural heritage at a glance. Four case studies about the perception of digi-
    tal architectural 3D models. In: Alonso F (ed) 2018 3rd digital heritage international congress
    (DigitalHERITAGE) held jointly with 2018 24th international conference on virtual systems &
    multimedia (VSMM 2018). IEEE, San Francisco
18. Apollonio FI et al (2013) 3D modeling and data enrichment in digital reconstruction of archi-
    tectural heritage. Int Arch Photogram Remote Sens Spat Inf Sci XL-5/W2; XXIV international
    CIPA symposium, 2–6 September 2013, Strasbourg, pp 43–48
19. Apollonio FI (2016) Classification schemes for visualization of uncertainty in digital hypothet-
    ical reconstruction. In: Münster S et al (eds) 3D research challenges in cultural heritage II: how
    to manage data and knowledge related to interpretative digital 3D reconstructions of cultural
    heritage. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 173–197
References                                                                                         159


 20. Lengyel D et al (2011) Darstellung von unscharfem Wissen in der Rekonstruktion historischer
     Bauten. In: Heine K et al (eds) Von Handaufmaß bis High Tech III. 3D in der historischen
     Bauforschung. Verlag Philipp von Zabern, Darmstadt, pp 182–186
 21. Fornaro P (2016) Farbmanagement im 3D Raum. In: Der Modelle Tugend 2.0
 22. Yaneva A (2005) Scaling up and down: extraction trials in architectural design. Soc Stud Sci
     35(6):867–894
 23. Bernardini W et al (2013) Quantifying visual prominence in social landscapes. J Archaeol Sci
     40(11):3946–3954
 24. Polig M et al (2021) Assessing visual perception in heritage sites with visual acuity: case study
     of the Cathedral of St. John the Theologian in Nicosia, Cyprus. ACM J Comput Cult Herit
     14(1)
 25. Ogburn DE (2006) Assessing the level of visibility of cultural objects in past landscapes. J
     Archaeol Sci 33(3):405–413
 26. Paliou E (2018) Visual perception in past built environments: theoretical and procedural issues
     in the archaeological application of three-dimensional visibility analysis. In: Siart C et al (eds)
     Digital geoarchaeology. Natural science in archaeology. Springer International Publishing,
     Cham, pp 65–80
 27. Karelin D et al (2019) Methods of reconstructions’ presentation and the peculiarities of human
     perception → 3D reconstruction, angle of view, architecture, methodology, perspective, plane
     of projection, presentation, Rauschenbach, viewpoint, visualisation. In: Kuroczyński P et al
     (eds) Der Modelle Tugend 2.0: Digitale 3D-Rekonstruktion als virtueller Raum der architek-
     turhistorischen Forschung. Heidelberg, pp 186–201
 28. Rauschenbach B (2002) Geometry of picture and visual perception
 29. Johnson MH (2012) Phenomenological approaches in landscape archaeology. Annu Rev
     Anthropol 41(1):269–284
 30. Mondini D et al (eds) (2014) Manipulating light in pre-modern times. Architectural, artistic
     and philosophical aspects. Mendrisio
 31. Happa J et al (2012) Cultural heritage predictive rendering. Comput Graph Forum 31:1823–
     1836
 32. Noback A (2019) Lichtsimulation in der digitalen Rekonstruktion historischer Architek-
     tur. Baugeschichte, Computervisualisierung, Lichtsimulation, Predictive Rendering. In:
     Kuroczyński P et al (eds) Der Modelle Tugend 2.0: Digitale 3D-Rekonstruktion als virtueller
     Raum der architekturhistorischen Forschung. Heidelberg, pp 162–185
 33. Noback A et al (2014) Complex material models in radiance. In: Paper presented at the 13th
     radiance workshop, London
 34. Papadopoulos C et al (2014) Formal three-dimensional computational analyses of archaeo-
     logical spaces. In: Paliou E et al (eds) Spatial analysis and social spaces. De Gruyter, pp
     135–166
 35. Happa J et al (2010) Illuminating the past: state of the art. Virtual Real 14(3):155–182
 36. Happa J et al (2020) Studying illumination and cultural heritage. In: Liarokapis F et al (eds)
     Visual computing for cultural heritage. Springer series on cultural computing. Springer Inter-
     national Publishing, Cham, pp 23–42
 37. Apollonio FI et al (2021) the critical digital model for the study of unbuilt architecture. In:
     Niebling F et al (eds) Research and education in urban history in the age of digital libraries.
     Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 3–24
 38. Healey CG (1996) Choosing effective colours for data visualization. In: Proceedings of seventh
     annual IEEE visualization’96. IEEE, pp 263–270
 39. Boochs F (2012) COSCH − colour and space in cultural heritage, A new COST action starts.
     In: Paper presented at the EuroMed, Lemesos, Cyprus
160                                                                                  7 Visualization


40. Martos A et al (2015) Acquisition and reproduction of surface appearance in architectural
    orthoimages. Int Arch Photogram Remote Sens Spat Inf Sci XL-5/W4:139–146
41. Dhanda A et al (2019) Recreating cultural heritage environments for VR using photogramme-
    try. Int Arch Photogram Remote Sens Spat Inf Sci XLII-2/W9:305–310
42. Apollonio FI, Foschi R, Gaiani M (2016) Una nuova acqua per la Fontana del Nettuno
    di Bologna: la simulazione di progetto del sistema degli zampilli/New water for the Nep-
    tune Fountain in Bologna: simulation of the design of the multi-jet system. In: Disegnare
    idee Immagini, Gangemi Editore, 53, pp 68–79. https://www.torrossa.com/en/resources/an/
    4570868
43. Apollonio FI et al (2017) A Journey in the Fourteenth Century. A Digital Reconstruction of
    Piazza delle Erbe in Verona. In: Disegno, 1, pp 35–44
44. Andrew Webster BABPIASCU (2019). https://www.theverge.com/2014/10/31/7132587/ass
    assins-creed-unity-paris
45. Bekerman R (2017) The TimeRide VR experience
46. Apollonio FI et al (2013) Characterization of Uncertainty and Approximation in Digital
    Reconstruction of CH Artifacts. In: Gambardella C (ed) Heritage Architecture Land design.
    Focus on Conservation Regeneration Innovation. Le vie dei Mercanti XI Forum Internazionale
    di Studi. Napoli. La scuola di Pitagora Editrice, pp 860–869. ISBN: 978886542290
47. Sîrbu D (2003) Digital exploration of unbuilt architecture: a non-photorealistic approach. In:
    Proceedings of the 23th Annual Conference of the Association for Computer-Aided Design in
    Architecture (ACADIA)
48. Apollonio FI et al (2021) La ricostruzione digitale della mostra allo Spirito Santo. In: Costarelli
    A (ed) Antonio Canova e Bologna. Alle origini della Pinacoteca. Milano, Electa, pp 104–113
49. Migliari R, Fasolo M (2022) Prospettiva. Teoria e applicazioni. Hoepli Milano
50. Apollonio FI et al (2021) Three points of view for the drawing adoration of the magi by
    Leonardo da Vinci. Heritage 4(3):2183–2204. https://doi.org/10.3390/heritage4030123
51. Baglioni L, Fallavollita F (2021) Generative models for relief perspective architectures. Nexus
    Netw J 23:879–898. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00004-021-00565-w
52. Pedersen I et al (2017) More than meets the eye: the benefits of augmented reality and holo-
    graphic displays for digital cultural heritage. ACM J Comput Cult Herit 10(2):Article 11
53. Wheatley D (2014) Connecting landscapes with built environments: visibility analysis, scale
    and the senses. In: Paliou E et al (eds) Spatial analysis and social spaces. De Gruyter, pp 115–
    134
54. Llobera M (2007) Reconstructing visual landscapes. World Archaeol 39(1):51–69
55. Frieman C et al (2007) Seeing is perceiving? World Archaeol 39(1):4–16
56. Pfarr-Harfst M (2013) Virtual scientific models. In: Ng K et al (eds) Electronic visualisation
    and the arts. London, pp 157–163
57. Günther H (2001) Kritische Computer-Visualisierung in der kunsthistorischen Lehre. In:
    Frings M (ed) Der Modelle Tugend. CAD und die neuen Räume der Kunstgeschichte. Weimar,
    pp 111–122
58. Münster S (2011) Militärgeschichte aus der digitalen Retorte - Computergenerierte 3D-
    Visualisierung als Filmtechnik. In: Kästner A et al (eds) Mehr als Krieg und Leidenschaft.
    Die filmische Darstellung von Militär und Gesellschaft der Frühen Neuzeit (Militär und
    Gesellschaft in der frühen Neuzeit, 2011/2). Potsdam, pp 457–486
59. Berndt E et al (2000) Cultural heritage in the mature era of computer graphics. IEEE Comput
    Graph Appl 20(1):36–37
60. Glotzbach U (2010) Zur heuristischen Funktion der technischen Handzeichnung. acatech
    DISKUTIERT 0:105–119
References                                                                                         161


 61. Azuma R et al (2001) Recent advances in augmented reality. IEEE Comput Graph Appl
     21(6):34–47
 62. Wikimedia (2020) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extended_reality
 63. Milgram P et al (1994) Augmented reality: a class of displays on the reality-virtuality contin-
     uum. SPIE 2351
 64. Russo M (2021) AR in the architecture domain: state of the art. Appl Sci-Basel 11(15):6800
 65. Tatzgern M et al (2013) Dynamic compact visualizations for augmented reality. In: 2013 IEEE
     virtual reality (VR). IEEE, pp 3–6
 66. Tatzgern M et al (2016) Adaptive information density for augmented reality displays. In: IEEE
     Virtual reality (VR). IEEE, pp 83–92
 67. Büschel W et al (2016) Improving 3D visualizations. In: Paper presented at the proceedings of
     the 2016 ACM companion on interactive surfaces and spaces, Niagara Falls, Ontario, Canada
 68. Burmester M et al (2018) Lost in Space? 3D-Interaction-Patterns für einfache und positive
     Nutzung von 3D Interfaces. In: Hess S et al (eds) Mensch und computer 2018 – usability
     professionals (electronic book). Gesellschaft für Informatik e.V. und German UPA e.V., Bonn
 69. ViMM WG 2.2 (2017) Meaningful content connected to the real world (report)
 70. Bekele MK et al (2018) A survey of augmented, virtual, and mixed reality for cultural heritage.
     ACM J Comput Cult Herit 11(2):Article 7
 71. Luna U et al (2019) Augmented reality in heritage apps: current trends in Europe. Appl Sci-
     Basel 9(13):2756
 72. Balletti C et al (2017) 3D printing: state of the art and future perspectives. J Cult Herit 26:172–
     182
 73. Grellert M (2016) Rapid prototyping in the context of cultural heritage and museum dis-
     plays. buildings, cities, landscapes, illuminated models. In: Münster S et al (eds) 3D research
     challenges in cultural heritage II. Springer LNCS, Cham
 74. Codarin S (2018) The conservation of cultural heritage in conditions of risk, with 3D print-
     ing on the architectural scale. In: Ioannides M (ed) Digital cultural heritage. Lecture notes in
     computer science. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 239–256
 75. Scopigno R et al (2017) Digital fabrication techniques for cultural heritage: a survey. Comput
     Graph Forum 36(1):6–21
 76. Neumüller M et al (2014) 3D printing for cultural heritage: preservation, accessibility, research
     and education. In: 3D research challenges in cultural heritage. Springer, pp 119–134
 77. Bourell D et al (2017) Materials for additive manufacturing. CIRP Ann 66(2):659–681
 78. Rase W-D (2007) Herstellung von 3D-Modellen mit Rapid-Prototyping-Verfahren
 79. Scopigno R et al (2014) Digital fabrication technologies for cultural heritage (STAR). EURO-
     GRAPHICS workshops on graphics and cultural heritage (Klein R, Santos P (eds))
 80. Grissom S et al (2003) Algorithm visualization in CS education: Comparing levels of student
     engagement. In: Paper presented at the ACM symposium on software visualization, San Diego
 81. Tullis T et al (2008) Measuring the user experience
 82. Dörner R et al (2013) Wahrnehmungsaspekte von VR. In: Dörner R (ed) Virtual und aug-
     mented reality (VR/AR). Springer, Heidelberg, pp 33–63
 83. Kim YM et al (2021) A comparative study of navigation interfaces in virtual reality environ-
     ments: a mixed-method approach. Appl Ergon 96:103482
 84. Sagnier C et al (2020) User acceptance of virtual reality: an extended technology acceptance
     model. Int J Hum-Comput Interact 36(11):993–1007
 85. Ress S et al (2018) Mapping history: orienting museum visitors across time and space. ACM
     J Comput Cult Herit 11(3):Article 16
 86. Hornecker E et al (2019) Human-computer interactions in museums. Synth Lect Hum-Center
     Inf 12(2):i–153
162                                                                                  7 Visualization


 87. Panou C et al (2018) An architecture for mobile outdoors augmented reality for cultural her-
     itage. ISPRS Int J Geo Inf 7(12):463
 88. Haahr M (2017) Creating location-based augmented-reality games for cultural heritage. Joint
     international conference on serious games. Springer, pp 313–318
 89. Maguid Y (2020) Ubisoft creates VR experience at Smithsonian’s age-old cities exhibition
 90. Deterding S et al (2011) From game design elements to gamefulness: defining” gamification”.
     In: Proceedings of the 15th international academic MindTrek conference: envisioning future
     media environments, pp 9–15
 91. Garcia-Fernandez J et al (2019) Cultural heritage and communication through simulation
     videogames-a validation of minecraft. Heritage 2(3):2262–2274
 92. Urban RJ (2007) A second life for your museum: 3D multi-user virtual environments and
     museums
 93. Kotsopoulos KI et al (2019) An authoring platform for developing smart apps which elevate
     cultural heritage experiences: a system dynamics approach in gamification. J Ambient Intell
     Hum Comput 1–17
 94. Doukianou S et al (2020) Beyond virtual museums: adopting serious games and extended real-
     ity (XR) for user-centred cultural experiences. In: Liarokapis F et al (eds) Visual computing
     for cultural heritage. Springer series on cultural computing. Springer International Publishing,
     Cham, pp 283–299
 95. Liarokapis F et al (2017) Multimodal serious games technologies for cultural heritage. In:
     Ioannides M et al (eds) Mixed reality and gamification for cultural heritage. Springer Inter-
     national Publishing, Cham, pp 371–392
 96. Miller C (2014) Digital storytelling: a creator’s guide to interactive entertainment, vol. 3
 97. László J (2008) The science of stories: An introduction to narrative psychology
 98. Kahneman D (2011) Thinking, fast and slow
 99. Herman D (2007) Storytelling and the sciences of mind: cognitive narratology, discursive
     psychology, and narratives in face-to-face interaction. Narrative 15(3):306–334
100. Constantine LL et al (2002) Usage-centered engineering for Web applications. IEEE Softw
     19(2):42
101. Sylaiou S et al (2020) Storytelling in virtual museums: engaging a multitude of voices. In:
     Liarokapis F et al (eds) Visual computing for cultural heritage. Springer series on cultural
     computing. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 369–388
102. Rizvic S et al (2020) Digital storytelling. In: Liarokapis F et al (eds) Visual computing for cul-
     tural heritage. Springer series on cultural computing. Springer International Publishing, Cham,
     pp 347–367
103. Katifori A et al (2020) Exploring the potential of visually-rich animated digital storytelling for
     cultural heritage. In: Liarokapis F et al (eds) Visual computing for cultural heritage. Springer
     series on cultural computing. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 325–345
104. Partarakis N et al (2020) Transforming heritage crafts to engaging digital experiences. In:
     Liarokapis F et al (eds) Visual computing for cultural heritage. Springer International Publish-
     ing, Cham, Springer Series on Cultural Computing, pp 245–262
105. Liuzzo P et al (2017) Storytelling and digital epigraphy-based narratives in linked open data.
     In: Ioannides M et al (eds) Mixed reality and gamification for cultural heritage. Springer
     International Publishing, Cham, pp 507–523
106. Storytelling in cultural heritage: tourism and community engagement (2022), pp 22–37
107. McMillan M et al (2019) Assassin’s creed, an analysis. In: Lee N (ed) Encyclopedia of com-
     puter graphics and games. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 1–11
References                                                                                     163


108. Casillo M et al (2016) An ontological approach to digital storytelling. In: Proceedings of the
     the 3rd multidisciplinary international social networks conference on social informatics 2016,
     data science, pp 1–8
109. Münster S, Maiwald F, Bruschke J, Kröber C, Sun Y, Dworak D, Komorowicz D, Munir I,
     Beck C, Münster DL (2024) A digital 4D information system on the world scale: research
     challenges, approaches, and preliminary results. Applied Sciences 14:1992
110. Akenine-Moller T, Haines E, Hoffman N, Pesce A, Iwanicki M, Hillaire S (2018) Real-time
     rendering, 4th edn. ISBN-13: 978–1138627000, ISBN-10: 1138627003
111. Pharr M, Jakob W, Humphreys G (2016) Physically based rendering: from theory to imple-
     mentation, 3rd edn. ISBN: 9780128006450




Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropri-
ate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license
and indicate if changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statu-
tory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder.
