                                              Book proposal form
Thank you for your interest in publishing with us.

The following questions are designed to provide a clear picture of your proposed book, which will help us to evaluate the potential publication. Please
complete the questions as precisely as you can and provide a short CV of each author/editor.

Please note:
     -    We ask for sole consideration of your proposed book. If you have submitted this proposal to any other publisher, please let us know.
     -    All entries should be in the language of your proposed book.
     -    By making use of our Search Engine Optimization (SEO) guidelines you can help potential readers to easily find your book. The SEO Tips for
          Book Authors will support you in drafting key essential book information in this form (such as title, back cover copy, unique selling points,
          etc.) to attract a targeted audience.
     -    Please do not include hyperlinks in this form besides your email address.
                                                                                                                                     *Mandatory field
Corresponding Author/Editor

First name*                                                                      Last name*


Please consider that this is how your name will appear in the book.
Email*


ORCID iD
We recommend registering a unique identifier to identify you from other researchers with similar names. You can register at orcid.org. e.g. 0000-0001-5000-0007
Institution



Institution                                                                      Department


City*


State                                                                            Country*



 Co-Author(s)/Co-Editor(s)

Additional Author(s)/Editor(s)
In case of co-authors or co-editors, please provide detailed information (name, address, etc.)
                                             Book proposal form
Biography*
Please provide a short biography highlighting any personal and/or professional details relevant to your research proposal e.g. related research
experience, work experience, previous books etc. Ideally this should be 2-3 paragraphs.
It would be very helpful if you could provide your CV.




About your Book

By making use of our Search Engine Optimization (SEO) guidelines you can help potential readers to easily find your book. The SEO Tips for Book Authors
will support you in drafting key essential book information in this form (such as title, back cover copy, unique selling points, etc.) to attract a targeted
audience.

Proposed Title *
Please enter the provisional title of your book.
Titles should precisely describe the content. Avoid catchy titles that readers will not find when searching online or titles which may mislead readers to
another topic. Utilize main keywords when creating a title and note that only 50 characters are displayed in most search results.




Subtitle




Originality of work*
Please note that if your work has been previously published by an other publisher you will need the rights to publish in print and digital formats. Please
check with the original publisher regarding their re-use policy.
Select an item.
Choose
Type of book*
Select


Is this an authored or edited work?
Select


Length
Please state the following:
Estimated number of pages in the book*
If you can provide the number of words in the book, please include this in the additional text field at the bottom of this form.



Estimated number of black and white figures to be included
                                              Book proposal form
Estimated number of color figures to be included




Whether the book will contain electronic supplementary material
         Yes             No

Submission date*
Please indicate the date on which you expect to submit the complete manuscript.

Month                                                                           Year



Table of contents*
Please provide a list of all preliminary chapter titles in the field below. In addition, please provide your table of contents with further details as well as
a sample chapter, if available. Ideally this should be a chapter by chapter synopsis of the project. We recommend you state the chapter title and three
or four sentences per chapter explaining the planned contents. For edited works, please also provide the tentative list of contributing authors. If you
do not have that level of detail yet, please enter as much information as possible.




Description of the Book*
Using the SEO Tips for Book Author`s please provide a descriptive text of what the book is about, keeping the target audience in mind. What are the
main topics? Why are they important/relevant? What problem do you set out to solve? Max. 3000 characters including spaces. Please note that the
first two sentences are the most enticing for readers and should be to the point, succinct and relevant. We suggest starting the first sentence with “This
book offers/provides etc…” and ending the text with a short description of the target audience.




Keywords*
Using the SEO Tips for Book Authors please enter between 5 and 20 keywords that when typed in a search engine will increase the chances of your
book appearing amongst the top results. Max. 64 characters including spaces per keyword.
Avoid one-word keywords by using strings of text (E.g. Sustainable development initiatives in Australia).
                                             Book proposal form
Unique Selling Points*
Please enter 3-5 one-line bullet points describing what makes your book unique and appealing. (E.g. provides a comprehensive review of the rapidly
expanding field of X, includes in-depth discussions on Y, covers a vast array of special topics and applications illustrating the wide use Z.). Max. 120
characters including spaces per line.
Use speech-act verbs or the active voice when writing USP texts.




Audience/market*
What is the intended market/readership?

Select

Competing titles
Please list (including author, title and publisher) those publications that your primary readership is currently buying or using. What are the key benefits
of your work compared to those publications you have listed? Where do they overlap and how do they differ?




Open access
Open access allows unrestricted online access to your work with no reading or subscription fees and Springer Nature offers a range of open access
options.


Please indicate if your research was funded, and if applicable provide the name of the funder.
☐ Not funded
☐ Funded (Name of funding organization/institution)

Please indicate if you are interested in making your publication available open access.
☐ My funder requires open access publication
☐ Open access publication is not required, but I wish to explore this route
☐ I am not required/do not wish to publish open access
                                             Book proposal form
Is there anything else you would like to bring to our attention regarding this proposal?
For example a preferred book series, potential textbook courses or any other information requested by your Springer Nature Editor.
If available, please provide any other extra material supporting your proposal such as sample chapter(s), bibliography or any other manuscript material
in PDF or Word format.
To learn more about the benefits of becoming a Springer Nature author/editor visit our website.




Thank you for taking the time to fill out this form.
On submission, your proposal will be read by the appropriate commissioning editor who will, if necessary, discuss it with colleagues and/or send it for
review by one or more external advisers chosen by us for their specialist and/or market expertise. After the initial assessment, we will contact you to
let you know how we wish to proceed.




                                                                     Springer Nature Privacy Policy: https://authorservices.springernature.com/privacy/
