Study on quality in 3D digitisation of
tangible cultural heritage
This unique study on 3D digitisation provides exceptional results. It demonstrates that
complexity and quality are fundamental considerations in determining the necessary eﬀort
for a 3D digitisation project to achieve the required value of the output.

The study led by Cyprus University of Technology has identiﬁed all relevant elements for
successful 3D digitisation of cultural heritage, classifying them by degree of complexity and
purpose or use. The study also looked at what determines the quality of a 3D digitisation
project and made an inventory of existing formats, standards, guidelines and
methodologies used by the industry. This study
(https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/86092) (Executive summary in
French (https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/redirection/document/86101)) also collected a
number of projects and success stories serving as benchmarks for 3D digitisation of
tangible cultural heritage.

Dr. Marinos Ioannides of the Digital Heritage Research Lab (DHRLab) at Cyprus University of
Technology and Director of UNESCO Chair on Digital Cultural Heritage (CH) led this complex
and all-encompassing project, working with nine important players in the industry and a
number of external experts providing their research contributing to this exceptional study.


     The digital recording of CH is an essential step in understanding and conserving
     the values of the memory of the past, creating an exact digital record for the
     future, providing a means to educate, skill, and communicating the knowledge
     and value of the tangible objects to the society.


The complexity of 3D digitisation of an object, whether it is a building or a small object,
depends on many factors, such as the equipment being used, placement of the object or
monument, light conditions and texture of the material. All these factors increase the
complexity of the 3D digitisation project at hand.

Natural and man-made disasters makes 3D digitisation projects critical for the
reconstruction of cultural heritage buildings and objects that are damaged or lost in
earthquakes, ﬁres, ﬂooding or degenerated by pollution.

The quality of the result of a 3D digitisation project directly related to the amount of
funding available. Europe has a number of highly skilled SMEs in the area of 3D digitisation
and these companies wish to see more open procurement processes when objects or
buildings are to be digitised using 3D technologies.
Partners contributing to the study
   Cyprus University of Technology
   Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
   ArcTron 3D Vermessungstechnik & Softwareentwicklung
   Bene Construere Ltd
   Historic Environment Scotland
   International Council on Monuments and Sites
   National Technical University of Athens
   Politecnico di Milano
   Time Machine Organisation
   Zoller & Fröhlich GmbH

Summary
   The 3D digitisation of movable and immovable cultural heritage can be an
   exceptionally complex process.
   Factors such as the stakeholder requirements (available budget and time, expected
   use, required quality/accuracy), the characteristics of the object (size, geometry,
   surface, texture, material composition, state of conservation, location), the level of
   competence of the personnel involved and the type of equipment used, condition the
   production eﬀort and have a direct impact on the quality of the ﬁnal output.
   There are no internationally recognized standards or guidelines for planning,
   organising, setting up and implementing a 3D data acquisition project.
   As acquisition technologies and software systems become increasingly accessible,
   with photorealistic renderings now commonplace, it is even more crucial to
   understand the physics behind the hardware, the fundamentals of data capture and
   processing methodologies.
   The deﬁnition of the complexity of a 3D digitisation project should cover both data
   capture and data processing (point cloud/modelling), should be calculated objectively,
   should be estimated before the data acquisition phase, should connect quality,
   technology and the purpose of use.
   In cultural heritage projects, image-based data acquisition is usually preferred to other
   methods, such as laser scanning, because it is eﬃcient, non-intrusive, easily
   deployable indoors and outdoors and low cost.
   Quality parameters refer to diﬀerent stages of the 3D digitisation process and vary
   depending on the type of tangible cultural heritage and the equipment and
   methodology used and the possible purposes or uses of the resulting 3D material.
   There is no generally accepted standard for specifying the detail and accuracy
   requirements for geometric recordings of tangible objects. Accuracy refers to how
   close a measurement is to the true or correct value, whereas precision is how close
   the repeated measurements are to each other. A reliable survey instrument is
   consistent; a valid one is accurate.
   There are no guidelines on ways and minimum amounts of data to be collected or the
   quality to be achieved during data acquisition, which entirely depends on the
   stakeholder requirements.
   There is a pressing and urgent need for a technical speciﬁcation to ensure
   interoperability and longer term sustainability of 3D data metadata and paradata,
   deﬁning among other harmonised means to annotate 3D content, to combine 3D with
   audiovisual content, or to embed additional dimensions (e.g. time, material and story).
     Advancements in 3D data acquisition software leveraging artiﬁcial intelligence will
     make 3D digitisation easier, faster, more accurate, and more informative. Faster
     connections, bigger bandwidth and lower latency, will improve real time global use
     and long-term availability and preservation, allowing to work with larger data volumes
     and bigger 3D models of higher resolution.



Source URL:
https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/library/study-quality-3d-digitisation-tangible-cultural-he
ritage

© European Union, 2026 - Shaping Europe’s digital future
(https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en) - PDF generated on 28/04/2026

Reuse of this document is allowed, provided appropriate credit is given and any changes
are indicated (Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license).
For any use or reproduction of elements that are not owned by the EU, permission may
need to be sought directly from the respective right holders.


Source URL:
https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/library/study-quality-3d-digitisation-tangible-cultural-he
ritage
