      Juha Henriksson


Time Machine in Finland




      Cover: Time Machine Organisation

            Translation: Lingsoft

          ISBN 978-952-7460-00-9

         Music Archive Finland 2021
Contents
For the Reader                                                          4

Time Machine                                                            5
Time Machine Organisation                                               6
Action Plan for the Near Future                                         7
Request for Comments                                                    8
Local Time Machine Services                                             9
Project Scouting Service                                                9

Survey                                                                  11
Objectives of the Survey                                                11
Implementation of the Survey                                            12

Results                                                                 13
Society of Finnish Archivists                                           13
Citynomadi                                                              14
Central Archives for Finnish Business Records Elka                      15
The Association for Teachers of History and Social Studies in Finland   18
South-Eastern Finland University of Applied Sciences Xamk               19
National Archives of Finland                                            21
National Library of Finland                                             24
National Museum of Finland                                              32
The People’s Archives                                                   35
Finnish Folk Music Institute                                            36
Lingsoft                                                                39
Music Archive Finland                                                   41
Open Knowledge Finland                                                  43
The Päivälehti Archives                                                 46
Muisti Centre of War and Peace                                          47
The Finnish Literature Society                                          49
Finnish Museums Association                                             52
Society of Swedish Literature in Finland                                55
Tampere University Faculty of Social Sciences                           56
IT Centre for Science CSC                                               59
Turku University of Applied Sciences                                    61
University of Turku                                                     64
University of Turku History, Culture, and Arts Studies Archives         68
Labour Archives                                                         71
Finnish Broadcasting Company Yle Archives                               72
Mikael Agricola Society                                                 75


                                             2
Conclusions                                            79
Influencing the Content of the Time Machine Project    79
Development of National Infrastructure                 80
Local Time Machine Services                            81
Participation in International Time Machine Projects   82

Appendix: Questionnaire                                86




                                           3
For the Reader

This report is based on the extensive Time Machine in Finland survey, which I have carried
out part time for over a year, since April 2020. During the survey, I have examined the
capabilities and materials, as well as wishes and needs of the Finnish Time Machine
Organisation members. The aim of the survey has been to promote the networking of TMO
members, as well as to promote new cooperation projects. As awareness of the materials
and capabilities of domestic organisations grows, it is easier to form both national and
international Time Machine projects.

The Time Machine organisation includes 38 Finnish organisations, of which 26 have been
involved in the survey. They represent a diverse range of cultural heritage organisations,
but the survey has also included higher education institutions and companies, as well as
future user groups for Time Machine services.

Thanks to a comprehensive set of respondents, the survey promotes various types of
projects related to Time Machine in Finland, but at the same time it provides a fairly broad
and diverse picture of the state of digitalisation of cultural heritage in Finland.

I would like to thank all the involved organisations and their staff. Without their input and
commitment, the survey would not have been possible. I am also very grateful to Lingsoft
for offering to translate this book into English.

The survey was funded by the Ministry of Education and Culture, Society of Swedish
Literature in Finland, Society of Finnish Archivists, and Music Archive Finland.


In August 2021

Juha Henriksson




                                             4
Time Machine
Time Machine1 is a unique and broad project on a European and global scale, with the aim
of developing innovative solutions to translate cultural heritage material stored in
European archives, libraries, and museums, into digital format. Digital materials can be
studied and visualised in new ways, for example by using text and character recognition,
artificial intelligence, as well as 3D modelling.

The original action plan or roadmap2 of the Time Machine initiative, which was prepared in
2019, will take place for a period of ten years from 2020 to 2030. The roadmap is divided
into four basic pillars, the first of which has the aim to produce extensive digital cultural
heritage materials that are consistent and standardised. The first pillar will, among other
things, develop new digitisation methods, such as technologies based on X-ray techniques.
Simultaneously, methods based on artificial intelligence are produced, which can be used
to link and contextualise digital cultural heritage to promote research use. New long-term
preservation methods for digital data will also be developed.

The second pillar focuses on the implementation of joint Time Machine services and
creates the necessary infrastructure for the large-scale digitisation of cultural heritage, and
the processing and simulation of data. The second pillar also includes the so-called Local
Time Machine services.

The aim of the third pillar is to disseminate the results of the project extensively and
diversely. Supporting research and education is central, but the results of Time Machine
also serve libraries, archives and museums, creative industries, smart tourism, urban
planning, as well as land use, and regional policy.

The fourth pillar of Time Machine, "innovation and information", serves the entire project.
It aims to answer a wide range of practical questions related to the project: What legal
questions and restrictions are involved in digital cultural heritage and how should
legislation be developed? Where does the funding needed for Time Machine and related
local projects come from? How to store data in a sustainable manner? How are experts and
citizens informed about the project and its results?

Time Machine initiative competed for a billion Euro FET Flagship funding from the European
Commission. In spring 2019, Time Machine succeeded to become one of the six finalists,
among hundreds of projects, and received the best possible grade in the mid-evaluation of
applications. However, the Commission decided not to finance any new FET Flagship
projects. Since then, other EU funding channels have been sought for the Time Machine

1 https://www.timemachine.eu
2 https://www.timemachine.eu/time-machine-roadmaps-mapping-the-future/




                                              5
initiative. At the moment, the aim is that the project could receive broader funding from
2024, at the latest.


Time Machine Organisation
To achieve the objectives of the Time Machine project, the Time Machine Organisation
(TMO) was established in 2019. Already, nearly 700 organisations from across Europe have
joined. The members include a large number of cultural heritage organisations, as well as
universities and research institutes, but also private sector operators, such as IT companies.

TMO also includes associations and communities. If the member organisations of these
communities are included, more than 14,000 organisations and over 100,000 professionals
are directly or indirectly involved in Time Machine. In other words, it is a very extensive
network, which provides new opportunities for cooperation and funding.

Finland has also been enthusiastically involved. In April 2021, TMO already includes 38
Finnish organisations or communities. Three of which are founding members: the National
Archives of Finland, the National Library of Finland, and the University of Tampere.

    •   Aalto University
    •   Agricola – The Finnish Network for the Humanities
    •   Society of Finnish Archivists
    •   Citynomadi
    •   CSC – IT Centre for Science
    •   Disec
    •   Central Archives for Finnish Business Records, Elka
    •   Fabula Productions
    •   Helsinki City Museum
    •   Helsingin Sanomat Foundation
    •   University of Helsinki (HELDIG)
    •   History, Culture, and Arts Studies Archives
    •   The Association for Teachers of History and Social Studies in Finland
    •   South-Eastern Finland University of Applied Sciences Xamk
    •   Finnish Folk Music Institute
    •   National Archives of Finland
    •   National Library of Finland
    •   National Museum of Finland
    •   Open Knowledge Finland
    •   The People’s Archives
    •   Lingsoft Group Inc.
    •   Mikael Agricola Society
    •   Mikkeli Development Miksei Ltd


                                              6
    •   Music Archive Finland
    •   Paavo Nurmi Festival
    •   Postal Museum
    •   Sibeliusmuseum
    •   StageZero
    •   The Association of Cultural Heritage Education in Finland
    •   Finnish Museums Association
    •   Muisti Centre of War and Peace
    •   Finnish Literature Society
    •   Society of Swedish Literature in Finland
    •   Turku University of Applied Sciences
    •   Labour Archives
    •   University of Tampere
    •   University of Turku
    •   Finnish Broadcasting Company Yle Archives

The number of Finnish TMO organisations, especially in proportion to the population, is
among the highest in Europe, with more members only in Germany, Italy, Spain, the
Netherlands, Austria, and France.

The Finnish Time Machine ambassadors 3 are Tomi Ahoranta (National Archives of Finland)
and Juha Henriksson (Music Archive Finland). The tasks of the TMO ambassadors include
communicating about the project, guiding new member organisations to membership, and
meetings with stakeholders relevant to the project.


Action Plan for the Near Future
Time Machine Organisation has published an action plan for 2020–20214. TMO is to invest
in the development and provision of services, which bring added value to the members of
the organisation. The focus areas are the development of Project Scouting Service and
support for Local Time Machine projects. In addition, the Time Machine roadmap will be
specified and developed into a more concrete direction by means of the Request for
Comments procedure, which for its part will improve the possibilities for obtaining funding.

At the same time, the aim is to develop technologies for the implementation of the Time
Machine project, which includes:



3 https://www.timemachine.eu/ambassadors/
4 https://www.timemachine.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/TMO-Operational-Plan_2020-

2021.pdf



                                             7
    •   Data processing infrastructure consisting of a digital content processor and
        various simulation engines
    •   Digitisation infrastructure consisting of a Europe-wide network of digitisation
        centres
    •   Technology developed for Local Time Machine services (Data Graph, 4D Maps,
        Code Library, Project Repository)

TMO's immediate objective is also to monitor the development of funding opportunities in
Horizon Europe, and other similar funding programmes. To this end, TMO will continue to
lobby the EU Commission and politicians, and cooperate with other cultural heritage
projects.


Request for Comments
The original Time Machine roadmap is extensive, but at the same time rather abstract. The
Request for Comments process 5 has been launched to specify more detailed content for
Time Machine. It is based on the process used to develop the IETF RFC 791 protocol, which
is adapted to the demands of Time Machine. The RFC process in Time Machine produces
openly available publications with a unique identifier. They define rules, recommendations,
and architecture options for different components of the Time Machine infrastructure.

Producing RFC documents is an open, collective process in which anyone can participate.
TMO's member organisations will thus be able to influence what kind of entity will be built
within the Time Machine framework. RFC documents cover not only the technical
infrastructure of Time Machine, but also the standards and legal context associated with
the project, as well as the general values and principles of the project.

Once approved by the RFC Editorial Committee, the draft RFC will be officially published as
a peer-reviewed publication. Draft and publication documents are available in the GitHub
RFC archive, where they can be commented.

It is important that Finnish TMO members actively participate in writing, editing, and/or
reviewing the RFC documents6. This will ensure that the infrastructure of the Time Machine
project considers issues, which are important for Finnish organisations.




5 https://www.timemachine.eu/building-a-time-machine/requests-for-comments/
6 https://www.timemachine.eu/building-a-time-machine/requests-for-comments/participate-in-

the-rfc-process/


                                             8
Local Time Machine Services
According to the current definition of TMO, Local Time Machines are the representation of
the collected Big Data of the Past of a geographic place (GeoEntity), created by the sum of
information provided by different projects and initiatives connected to this place 7. In
accordance with the new definition, a certain LTM is therefore not one specific project or
service, but it consists of a set of materials or services related to the same location.

The Time Machine website contains a register where local LTM projects can be proposed 8.
Projects can be proposed by all TMO members who have – either ongoing or already
completed – a project related to a specific location or a wider geographical area 9. Even if a
culturohistorical project is not directly related to a specific location, it can still be registered
on the LTM site, in which case the address of the organisation's headquarters will be
indicated.

The definition of Local Time Machine has changed from how LTM services were defined in
2019. However, nothing prevents a number of organisations from continuing to
cooperatively provide a virtual presentation service of Vyborg, for example, but according
to the policies of the Time Machine organisation, it is not possible to name such a service
"Vyborg Time Machine", but rather to name it in a different manner.

Nevertheless, the LTM on Vyborg can also be built in a manner where different
organisations register their own materials or services concerning Vyborg on the LTM
website, in which case "Vyborg Time Machine" is an entity of these materials and services.



Project Scouting Service
The Time Machine Project Scouting Service10 supports TMO members in forming
competitive project consortia and sending high-quality project proposals, in particular for
various EU funding channels. Project Scouting Service also provides support for networking.

Project Scouting Services include:
    • Information and advice on appropriate third-party funding arrangements
    • Support for finding partners for project consortia
    • Participation of the TMO central organisation in projects
    • Advice and services for preparing project proposals

7 https://www.timemachine.eu/ltms/
8 https://www.timemachine.eu/building-a-time-machine/propose-an-ltm-project/
9 https://www.timemachine.eu/building-a-time-machine/ltm-faq/
10 https://www.timemachine.eu/building-a-time-machine/project-scouting-service/




                                                 9
The TMO Central Organisation can participate in projects in three ways: 1) TMO
coordinates the project, 2) TMO participates in the project as a partner, or 3) TMO supports
the project with a written recommendation. The Project Scouting Service also helps TMO
members to form projects and obtain funding in which the TMO central organisation does
not participate.




                                            10
Survey
Finnish members include various types of organisations and communities, whose needs
and capabilities vary greatly from the perspective of Time Machine. The purpose of this
survey was to map out which systems and services, already available to Finnish members,
could be brought under the Time Machine entity, to enable the services to receive
international funding and/or foreign users. In addition, several new system development
projects are underway in Finland, which may possibly be integrated into the Time Machine
entity, allowing their funding base to be expanded.

Finnish members include 1) cultural heritage organisations which could enhance the
digitisation of their materials and offer their data for use in new ways through Time
Machine, 2) researchers and teachers who are future user groups of Time Machine, and 3)
companies and IT sector operators that could assist in implementing local Time Machine
services. The survey mapped the views of all these groups.


Objectives of the Survey
The following objectives were set for the survey:

Extension of the funding base for existing national services: Can national systems and
services be integrated into the Time Machine entity, allowing them to apply for EU funding?
The funding base for new system development projects could also be expanded with Time
Machine funding.

Improved efficiency of the national research system: Significantly accelerating the
digitisation of cultural heritage organisations' materials, and reducing costs. Processing
materials, for example by linking, text recognition, and simulation. Developing
technological solutions for the long-term preservation of digital materials.

Promoting interoperability: If national services and systems are integrated into the Time
Machine entity, their interoperability will improve both at national and international level.

Promoting citizen science and science education: Providing cultural heritage materials in
entirely new ways for the use of citizens, schoolchildren, students, and teachers, utilising
visualisation, simulation, and 3D modelling.

Promoting open science: The EU-level cooperative development of legislation and ethical
principles governing the opening of data.




                                             11
Developing relations between science and society: The results of Time Machine promote
the activities of authorities and companies, such as smart tourism, urban and land use
planning, as well as the entertainment and creative media industry.

Strengthening cooperation networks: The Time Machine Organisation already has 38
Finnish members representing cultural heritage organisations, communities, and private
sector actors, in a versatile manner. The survey will intensify cooperation between them.


Implementation of the Survey
The survey was implemented by sending a questionnaire to Finnish TMO members. Written
responses were complemented by video interviews in spring, summer, and autumn 2020.
Finally, the results of the questionnaire responses and video discussions were
supplemented on the basis of written material. A total of 26 organisations participated in
the survey.

The following issues were examined in the questionnaire and discussions:

    •   What systems already exist? Can these be brought into the Time Machine entity?
        What could be built on them in the Time Machine framework?
    •   What plans do Finnish TMO members have considering new systems and
        information services, that could be placed under the Time Machine umbrella?
    •   What materials could Finnish GLAM organisations have for this purpose?
    •   What are the wishes of future end users? How could Time Machine promote
        research and education, for example?
    •   What are the capabilities of higher education institutions and companies in terms
        of technical implementation?

The questionnaire is attached to this report.




                                            12
Results
Society of Finnish Archivists

The Society of Finnish Archivists 11 creates and maintains contacts between individuals
operating in the archive sector, as well as promotes knowledge and scientific research in
the field. The society organises meetings and seminars on topical issues in the archive
sector, takes a stand on key issues in the field, as well as maintains contacts with Finnish
and international organisations.

The Society of Finnish Archivists can support the Time Machine project, for example by
promoting the project both among its members and more broadly. The society may assist
in organising Time Machine events, for instance, as the society has existing networks and
experience in organising events. The Society of Finnish Archivists can also highlight the
perspectives of different user groups when developing Time Machine.

The Society of Finnish Archivists has supported the Time Machine survey financially.

Local Time Machine

Local Time Machine services could be built, for example, in connection with historical
castles. Suomenlinna, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, could serve as a pilot. Suomenlinna
has a connection to a wide range of archive and museum materials – from the construction
stage to the present day. Oral history has been collected from Suomenlinna, and there have
been prison camps during the Civil War, for instance. For example, the Helsinki City
Museum has a lot of material from Suomenlinna, and it has previously implemented an
online exhibition on Helsinki in the 1700s and the construction of Suomenlinna.

From Suomenlinna the project could proceed to other historical castles in Finland. 3D-
modelled buildings and historical documents could be combined, for example, with films
shot in castles, which also present environments that may already be lost. The archive of
the University of Helsinki has an archive of the Turku Academy, which contains a lot of
impressive material and interesting personal archives. Could the fragments of the National
Library, which include, for example, a lot of medieval liturgic music, provide a soundscape
for LTM services? The fragments are also very impressive.

If only one national LTM service is implemented, it cannot be too tied to a specific location,
in order for it to serve the entire Finland. Would it be possible to implement a mobile


11 http://arkistoyhdistys.fi/index.php/the-society-of-finnish-archivists/. Interviewees Juha

Hannikainen, Marja Piiroinen-Honkanen, and Johanna Mieto, 12 May 2020.



                                                 13
service that allows you to visit virtually different parts of Finland? And would it be possible
to cooperate with Heureka?


Citynomadi
Citynomadi12 is a company established in 2009 that visualises interactivity and various data
on a map. Customers include several artistic and cultural heritage actors. Citynomadi is
strongly internationally networked.

The OpenStreetMap service provided by Citynomadi is global and multilingual. Interfaces
are used to combine different types of information, open data, IoT feeds, and feedback, as
well as crowdsourced information. The Nomadi application13 implemented by Citynomadi
is available in app stores.

Map-based Services

A large number of cultural heritage tours based on the Nomadi application have been
carried out. The various types of routes14 include Eastern Lapland, Turku Cathedral, Old
Rauma, and Seurasaari. The service provided by Citynomadi also includes the "Community"
side, where you can make different sets of themes without a separate agreement. For
example, village activists create content that can be used to navigate the village roads and
familiarise oneself with them.

The Avoimet Kylät (“Open Villages”) day is an annual online event15. A village can publish
various digital content, such as videos and photographs, village history, outdoor trails, and
its hiking destinations. Villages and municipalities publish the produced digital material on
their own channels on the day of the event, and the links to the channels are collected on
the event map. Citynomadi also has foreign customers. For example, a Beethoven walk 16
for the Haus der Musik Museum in Vienna.

A part of the map services produced by Citynomadi, have been based on the utilisation of
open interfaces with regard to data, so that the material connected to a specific location is
not predetermined. For example, an event map was created for the Turku Capital of Culture
2011, in which other events in Turku were sought, with an algorithm from the interface
provided by Heldig, and linked to events in the Capital of Culture.



12 https://www.citynomadi.com/?uiLang=en. Interviewee Merja Taipaleenmäki, 13 May 2020.
13 https://app.citynomadi.com
14 https://www.citynomadi.com/route
15 https://avoimetkylat.fi
16 https://www.citynomadi.com/route/e6ecf5d99b4e6175ded98ba70e24b03a




                                              14
Urban Planning

Citynomadi has had a few urban planning projects. A two-step study was carried out with
the Department of Geography at the University of Turku, which first asked about different
development options in the area on the map. In the second phase, videos of the response
options were created that modelled the area and brought the ideas to the context.
Tampere, in turn, modelled seniors' and immigrants' views on the attractiveness and safety
of the urban environment on a map basis.

In 2020, an international idea competition was organised for the development of the
surroundings of Turku Castle and the western shore of the Aurajoki river mouth17. The
competition area and its destinations were accessible through the Linnanniemi map in the
Citynomadi route service.

Development Ideas

Technology could be developed with a third party to analyse the information on the map
with the help of artificial intelligence, enabling users to make smart, context-sensitive
searches of the extensive data. Crowdsourcing can also be developed. How could map data
be enriched not only with the material of cultural heritage organisations but also with
citizens' own materials?

In smart tourism, map applications can help guide people more evenly across the city, and
find everyday life, in order to avoid all tourists visiting only a few of the most well-known
sites or walking along the same nature trail. This would also enable the areas around the
city to become vibrant and companies to receive new customers from tourists.


Central Archives for Finnish Business Records, Elka

The purpose of the activities of the Central Archives for Finnish Business Records 18 (Elka) is
to safeguard the preservation of history and tradition concerning Finnish business life. The
material in Elka is intended to be utilised by researchers from various disciplines and other
persons in need of the information. For this purpose, Elka collects, processes, and makes
available documentation and other material produced in the activities of companies,
private individuals, associations, and societies, such as drawings, maps, photographs, as
well as various sound and image recordings.




17 https://www.turku.fi/en/linnanniemi
18 https://www.elka.fi/index.php/fi/. Interviewee Jarmo Luoma-aho, 9 June 2020.




                                              15
Materials and Digitisation

Elka has approximately 30 shelf kilometres of material, mainly since the mid-1800s.
Materials older than 100 years can be published in terms of data protection. The newer
material may contain restrictions due to copyright or data protection.

The description requires a lot of human resources, which has thus far limited the amount
of digitised material. Materials are described and digital materials are managed in Disec
Oy's Yksa service. Elka has tested a Disec-implemented application that would directly
import metadata and digital objects from Microsoft SharePoint to Yksa, automatically.

There are currently about 26 TB of digital material. A significant part of these are sound
recordings and videos, that were digitised at the turn of the 2010s with the Ministry of
Education and Culture's project funding. Photographs have also been digitised for a long
time. Until now, digitisation has been carried out largely either through project funding or
for a specific purpose, such as a research project. Digitisation is carried out for
approximately 1 person-year, but in addition to retrospective digitisation, this also includes
digitisation related to customer service, publications, and image orders. A digitisation plan
has been drawn up for the digitisation of the materials, on the basis of which digitisation
will be implemented more systematically in the future.

Design Archive and 3D Modelling

The Design Archive19 is a national special archive of Finnish design, located in connection
with Elka. The purpose of the Design Archive is to collect and permanently store documents
and objects related to Finnish design, and to provide everyone interested in design with an
opportunity to study the materials. The objective of the archive is to promote research in
design, accessibility, and the preservation of cultural heritage.

3D models20 have been drawn up based on the materials of the Design Archive and Elka.
Drawings, photographs, and physical objects have been used for their implementation. The
3D models have been implemented in cooperation with South-Eastern Finland University
of Applied Sciences Xamk, during two different projects in 2011 and 2013.

Online Exhibitions

Elka's “Aikakone”21 (“Time Machine”) is aimed at the general public. The website is like a
showcase for Elka materials, and it contains images, videos, advertisements, drawings,



19 https://www.elka.fi/designarkisto/index.php/en/
20 https://www.elka.fi/designarkisto/index.php/fi/aineistot/aineistojen-3d-mallit
21 https://www.elka.fi/aikakone/




                                                16
documents, and other material from different decades. Elka also has its own channel on
YouTube22, and it is active in social media.

The Varkaus Museums’ and Elka’s Laivadata Service23 (“Ship Data Service”) provides the
archives of the Varkaus Shipyard as open data for everyone to access and use freely.
Combining data from two different types of memory organisations enables as
comprehensive an overview of the topic as possible.

So far, three online exhibitions24 have been carried out on the materials of the Design
Archive, which operates in connection with Elka: “Design is thinking”, “Industrial
Designers”, and “Success Stories of Design”.

Memoriaali

Elka is involved in a joint project aimed at developing the Memoriaali online service 25. The
project maps the existing operating models, systems, tools, and technical environments
developed for the reception and enrichment of digital data, as well as tests their suitability
as a platform for Memoriaali. The end result is an online service package that is
independent regarding material and operators.

As one part of Memoraali, a model for the reception of Elka's electronic material is being
piloted. The information received in the Memoriaali service is altered into an archived
format, metadata related to the content is added, the information is packaged in an
archived package if necessary, and validity and correctness checks are carried out.

In addition to Elka, the Memoriaali project also includes Mikkeli Development Miksei Ltd,
Muisti Centre of War and Peace, and South-Eastern Finland University of Applied Sciences
Xamk, which are all members of the Time Machine Organisation.

Development Opportunities

Until now, the description of the materials has been the bottleneck of digitisation.
Identifying handwritten text and automated metadata generation could help enhance
digitisation. From the perspective of Elka, the utilisation of X-ray technology in the
digitisation of old documents, is extremely interesting.




22 https://www.youtube.com/user/Elkatoyou
23 https://www.laivadata.fi
24 https://www.elka.fi/designarkisto/index.php/en/material/web-exhibitions
25 https://www.elka.fi/index.php/fi/palvelut/memoriaali-hanke




                                              17
In the future, researchers could be offered a service that would not require them to
physically be present in the research hall; instead, archives could be collected and digitised
on behalf of Elka, and tools for analysing them is provided.

Cooperation with Yksa organisations would be promoted if the interoperability of archive
and description systems could be improved through Time Machine.


The Association for Teachers of History and Social Studies in Finland
(HYOL)
The Association for Teachers of History and Social Studies 26 does not have the resources to
carry out development work on Time Machine -related issues, but it can inform a large
number of history and social studies teachers who, in turn, can disseminate information to
schoolchildren and students, especially in upper secondary and secondary schools. HYOL
has more than 20 local associations around Finland and a total of approximately 1,300
members.

Supporting Education

The teaching of history has changed in recent decades. Source criticism and the use of
materials are practised early. The digital materials of archives and museums provide
opportunities for the utilisation of original sources. At the same time, digital materials
protect the original material, which may be fragile. Therefore, digital materials give
schoolchildren and students access to material that has previously been protected from
use.

The technology used in teaching does not necessarily need to be based on the latest
AR/VR/3D technology to attract the interest of schoolchildren. Schools often do not have
the right equipment to utilise the latest software technology. Occasionally, even
surprisingly small things, such as turning black and white images into coloured, may be
enough to attract the students' interest.

Mobile access to education applications developed in Time Machine is an absolute
requirement, as there are often no computers or tablets available on behalf of the school,
so students use their own mobile phones.




26 https://www.hyol.fi/en/english/. Interviewee Kirsi Ruhanen, 17 August 2020.




                                               18
About Local Time Machine

Local Time Machine should not only present great men. It is important that the history of
ordinary adults and children, as well as different minorities is also shown. Additionally, all
material should be available in several languages.

The perspective of ordinary people is important to be considered even in the planning work
of a possible Local Time Machine. For example, Suomenlinna or Vyborg Castle are
interesting sites, but LTM could also be built around a croft in Kerimäki. For example, how
has life in a particular family or village community changed during history? When the aim
is to stimulate historical empathy in young people, it is often started with a matter
personally related to each pupil, such as the history of their own locality or family.

In addition to site-specificness, certain thematic entities could be considered. For example,
the history of diseases and medicine is an interesting perspective, which is made
particularly topical by the global coronavirus pandemic.



South-Eastern Finland University of Applied Sciences XAMK
Digitalia

Digitalia27 is a joint research and development centre for digital information management
at Xamk University of Applied Sciences28, the University of Helsinki, and the National Library
of Finland. Digitalia develops, for example, automatic file conversions, content analysis,
text recognition, image enhancement, anonymisation, and visualisation of data in game-
like 3D environments.

Digitalia handles various types of material, such as digitised text documents, photographs,
videos, and historical press material, as well as e-mails and social media data. In Digitalia,
even long-term preservation is developed and tested, for example by conducting migration
research and promoting the transfer of digital data from outdated platforms and media to
new systems. The aim is also to improve the usability and quality of digital historical
material.

Digitalia's partners include archives, libraries, research organisations, educational
institutions, companies, and organisations. Digitalia works closely with information
management and electronic archiving training, and organises a summer school of digital
information annually.

27 https://www.xamk.fi/en/rdi/digitalia-research-center-digital-information-management/
28 https://www.xamk.fi/en/frontpage/ Interviewees Noora Talsi, Anssi Jääskeläinen, and Miia

Kosonen, 25 May 2020.


                                               19
Data Processing

Digitalia solutions can be used to convert office formats, image files, and e-mails to
archived file formats with metadata. For e-mails, data can also be converted into a format
that enables visual network diagrams from discussion networks.

Digitalia has developed an open-source OCR workflow to process both individual image
files and entire folders at a time. When requested, one PDF document or Hocr / AltoXML
document containing OCR data is generated from the contents of the folder. The activities
are still partly under development, and partly fully completed.

OpenCV and AI-based methods have been tested with the National Archives of Finland, to
identify blank, handwritten, and machine written pages of texts, as well as text pages
containing both. This pilot has been completed, and as a result the pages containing data
were separated from the blanks with approximately 99% accuracy.

Competence Development

Digitalia organises seminars and webinars, and produces open and practical guidance
material, such as Digiopas (“Digital Guide”)29 and Tiedolla johtamisen käsikirja
(“Information Management Handbook”) 30. Digitalia's activities also cover the special
features of online cultural heritage material, recovery, and management, excluding legal
issues.

King’s Road Renascence

King's Road Renascence31 is a two-year international project, in which attractions and
service networks around the historic King's Road from Helsinki to St. Petersburg are
compiled on a new interactive digital platform, where they can be explored using VR/AR
technology. The platform serves companies and sites operating along the King's Road, for
which it is a visibility and an important marketing channel. The project also provides tools
for improving international cooperation around the King's Road theme and for enhancing
cooperation between companies and cultural sites along the route, as well as between
authorities and societies.

Memoriaali

Xamk is involved in the Memoriaali project32, which is also described in the sections on Elka
(page 15) and Muisti (page 47). Xamk works as a technical expert and implementer in the

29 https://digitalia.xamk.fi/digiopas
30 https://digitalia.xamk.fi/tijo
31 https://www.xamk.fi/en/research-and-development/kingsroad/
32 https://www.xamk.fi/tutkimus-ja-kehitys/memoriaali/




                                             20
project. The aim is to create a single shared Memoriaali solution, and then creating
separate online services for Muisti and Elka, which are distinguished between content and
appearance. The information received in the Memoriaali-Core is altered into an archived
format, metadata related to the content is added, the information is packaged in an
archived package if necessary, and validity and correctness checks are carried out.

Separate tools are also integrated into Memoriaali-Core to analyse and convert external
data storage media content to archive format, extract and further process files received in
various package formats into file formats suitable for the storage service, as well as package
the received data in archive packages that conform to the OAIS model. Xamk students will
be utilised in the development of Memoriaali, in the form of traineeships and theses.

Virtual Museum

Digitalia pilots a Virtual Museum 33 that is dynamic, interactive, and immersive. The solution
is based on the Unity gaming engine. The Virtual Museum pilot has cooperated with the
Design Archive, which operates in connection with the Central Archives for Finnish Business
Records. The museum environment is completely dynamic: For every visit, the entire
museum building with its floors, walls, ceilings, windows, materials, lightings, and objects
will be rebuilt. The museum visitor can also adjust the museum space to suit their
preferences. In virtual mode, both the actual 3D models and images from which the
museum creates 3D models, can be presented. Object-related metadata displayed to users
can be retrieved directly from the Yksa system or entered into a text file describing museum
objects. Downloading metadata from Finna service is under development.

Development Ideas

The OCR development work in the framework of Time Machine, would help to process the
content of digitised documents and other materials containing text, into a more easily
accessible format. Time Machine could also offer opportunities for testing and introducing
the virtual museum concept more broadly at both national and international level. At
Xamk, digital cultural heritage can be linked to tourism development projects, as well as to
urban architecture and planning.



National Archives of Finland
The National Archives of Finland 34 is responsible for the preservation of the national
documentary cultural heritage. It promotes information management based on artificial
intelligence and the renewing methods of science, as well as open access to document

33 https://read.xamk.fi/2020/digitaalinen-talous/digitalia-luo-dynaamista-virtuaalimuseota/
34 https://arkisto.fi/en/frontpage. Interviewees Tomi Ahoranta and Maria Kallio, 11 June 2020.




                                                21
information, together with its customers. The business area covers the entire Finland. The
National Archives of Finland receives documents handed over by the authorities, and
acquires and stores other data relevant to society and research.

The National Archive of Finland is a founding member of Time Machine Organisation.

Materials

The National Archives of Finland possesses over 200 shelf kilometres of material, most of
which are official data, such as documents of central government, ministries, and central
agencies, as well as courts of appeal, or documents of district and local authorities. A large
number of microfilm duplicates of documents from other archives have also been obtained
in the National Archives of Finland. The majority of the most used materials and microfilms
have been digitised. From the beginning of 2021, official data will mainly be received in
digital format.

The archives of municipalities that have remained behind the border as a result of wars,
materials from Lutheran parishes, along with archives of several individuals, families,
organisations, associations, and businesses are also stored in the National Archives of
Finland.

Material stored in the National Archives can be retrieved using the Astia online service (in
Finnish)35. The Astia service can also be used to access public digital material, and to apply
for access rights to restricted material. To use all the features of the Astia online service,
an electronic identification is required. It is also possible to search for material and view
public digital material without identification. In this case, personal archives and family
archives containing documents younger than 100 years are not included in the search for
data protection reasons.

The extensive and versatile materials of the National Archives of Finland are excellent
material from the perspective of various national or international development projects
related to Time Machine.

Digitisation of Materials

In the mass digitisation36 of the National Archives of Finland, the archived paper documents
of the state authorities are digitised, for them to be available in digital format. The aim is
to centralise the digitisation of approximately 135 shelf kilometres of archived documents,
making the task internationally unique, in terms of its scope and objective in the archive



35 https://astia.narc.fi/astiaUi/
36 https://arkisto.fi/massadigitointi




                                             22
sector. In 2019, before the transition to the production phase, the National Archives
implemented a mass digitisation pilot37.

Mass digitisation aims at a fully electronic operating environment, which
   • promotes better availability and usability of document information
   • enables the renewal of information management processes and methods
   • releases government agencies from paper archives, thus speeding up their
       transition to a fully electronic operating environment
   • saves preservation costs for archives in agencies and in the National Archives.

The paper documents will be destroyed after digitisation, and in order to enable this, the
National Archives has defined the requirements 38 for digitisation aiming at destruction.

The National Archives of Finland has accumulated experience and expertise in the mass
digitisation process of extensive data and its management, as well as the development of
the process by means of artificial intelligence. This competence is significant even in
international terms, which promotes opportunities to participate in joint international
mass digitisation projects.

Retrospective digitisation39 of National Archives data has also been implemented in
cooperation with research projects, in which case the research project has acquired
funding for digitising the data. Retrospective digitisation has also been carried out in
cooperation with the FamilySearch community.

Recognition of Handwritten Text

The National Archives of Finland was involved in the READ project40, funded under Horizon
2020 programme, which ended in summer 2019. The other partners of the project (13)
mainly came from Central Europe (Austria, Germany) and England. The majority of the
project partners were research institutes and universities. The project developed the
Transkribus research platform, which enables automated recognition of handwritten text
(HTR). The maintenance and development of the Transkribus platform will be continued by
the European Cooperative Society READ COOP SCE 41. The National Archives of Finland is
one of the founding members of the cooperative.




37 https://arkisto.fi/fi/viranomaisille/massadigitointi/masadigitoinnin-pilotti
38https://arkisto.fi/uploads/Viranomaisille/Määräykset%20ja%20ohjeet/Kansallisarkiston%20vaati

mukset%20havittamiseen%20tahtaavaan%20digitointiin.pdf
39 https://arkisto.fi/fi/aineistot/digitoinnin-eteneminen
40 https://makingamodernarchive.blogspot.com
41 https://readcoop.eu




                                                  23
The first large set of HTR-identified National Archives’ data is the Finnish Court Records
Search online service42 launched in November 2020, where it is possible to browse and
search for 19th century’s renovated court records, which are one of the largest collections
of the National Archives. The documents stored in the online service are minutes of reports
for the years 1809–1870, and deal with legal notices, land ownerships, guardianship
matters, and marriage contracts.

National Digitisation Centre project

In spring 2021, a study project will be carried out under the leadership of Mikkeli City
Development Miksei, which will produce information to support decision-making
concerning the establishment of a national digitisation centre, and examine the
prerequisites for the establishment and operation of a digitisation centre in Mikkeli.
Additionally, the report will provide basic information on the possibilities and alternatives
for the implementation of the digitisation centre. The report is related to the city of
Mikkeli's strategic development platform Memory Campus, a centre of expertise and
service for the archive and library sector.

Other Developments

From the perspective of the National Archives of Finland, the development of automatic
content analysis is crucial, in order to identify, for example, journal numbers, document
identifiers, and diary information, in connection with mass digitisation. In terms of
development work, active cooperation with other Nordic national archives is carried out.

The National Archives has participated in the international Book CT project, the purpose of
which is to develop X-ray computed tomography scan technology43 for the digitisation of
documents. Attempts have been made to obtain EU funding for the project. If the project
is implemented, the materials of the National Archives of Finland could be digitised using
X-ray technology, while simultaneously testing the functionality of the technology and the
process.

Thus far, photographs have been digitised relatively little in the National Archives of
Finland. A process for the digitisation and management of larger photographic entities is
being developed, and this could benefit from automated object recognition. The
technology could also be applied to old map materials, of which there are several millions
in the National Archives.




42 https://tuomiokirjat.narc.fi/en
43 https://youtu.be/q67HOVpLub0




                                             24
Local Time Machine

The materials of the National Archives of Finland can be used to produce a wide range of
Local Time Machine services, as the National Archives’ area of operation covers the entire
Finland. Suomenlinna is a potential Local Time Machine site, and there are plenty of
material related to it in the National Archives. In May 2021, for example, an extensive
exhibition44 showcasing Suomenlinna from the 1700s to the 2020s, will open at the
National Archives and the Suomenlinna Centre, where the original material related to
Viapori-Suomenlinna's history will be presented.


National Library of Finland
The National Library of Finland 45 is responsible for preserving, describing, and making
available the national publication heritage, as part of the augmentation of its unique
collections. The National Library of Finland also serves as the national service and
development unit for the library sector. The National Library of Finland strives to comply
with the FAIR principles46 in the development of its services, and to promote the
interoperability of the systems and materials of the GLAM organisations.

Digitisation

The publications of Finnish newspapers, as well as other materials, are digitised in the
National Library of Finland, annually, according to the digitisation programme. The focus of
digitisation is currently on the newspapers of the 1940s and in their own book collections.
The annual volume of their own digitisation activities is nearly two million pages.

The Mikkeli office47 has a wide and versatile range of manual level, book elevator, pass-
through, and microfilm scanners. Scannable materials include newspapers, magazines,
books, leaflets, roll films, and maps. Well-preserved books can be scanned almost
automatically using the 4DigitalBook robot scanner48, which produces up to thousands of
pages per day.


44 https://www.epressi.com/tiedotteet/kulttuuri-ja-taide/suomenlinnan-historiaa-kolmen-

valtakunnan-linnoituksena-juhlistetaan-laajalla-nayttelylla.html
45 https://www.kansalliskirjasto.fi/en. Interviewees Mikko Lappalainen, Erkki Tolonen, Maria

Virtanen, Osma Suominen, Minna Kaukonen, Liisa Savolainen, Johanna Lilja, and Liisa Näpärä, 18
June 2020. Interviewees Mikko Lappalainen, Johanna Lilja, Kristiina Hormia-Poutanen, Erkki
Tolonen, and Minna Kaukonen, 6 October 2020.
46 https://www.go-fair.org/fair-principles/
47 https://www.kansalliskirjasto.fi/fi/uutiset/kansalliskirjaston-digitointi-ja-konservointikeskus-on-

nyt-mikkelin-toimipiste
48 http://www.4digitalbooks.com/index.php




                                                  25
The post-processing of material scanned in Mikkeli, is done with a docWorks system 49,
specifically designed for mass digitisation. In the context of post-processing, the cropping
of pages, straightening of text sections, automated recognition of images and text sections,
and text recognition (OCR) are carried out. As an end product, a set of files is created that
contain all the files required for publication and long-term preservation of the work or
magazine, including metadata. The long-term preservation standard is METS.

Sound recording digitisation is carried out in three studios in Mikkeli. The system supplier
is NOA. The formats that can be digitised include CDs, Compact Cassettes, Micro and Mini
Cassettes, Reel-to-Reel Tapes, Vinyl Discs, Minidisc discs, and DAT's. The covers of the discs
and cassettes have their own scanner.

The digitisation of the National Library of Finland materials has also been implemented
using a partnership model with newspaper and media houses, foundations, and Kopiosto.

Digi.kansalliskirjasto.fi

Digi.kansalliskirjasto.fi is a digital content presentation system that contains magazine,
book, and small print material produced by the National Library of Finland, as well as the
option for presenting notes and maps. All written material of the National Library of Finland
is stored in a METS/ALTO format, suitable for long-term preservation, and preserved, at a
point, at CSC. The digital sound recording material is available online in the Raita (“Track”)
database50. Copyrighted materials are available in Varia (legal deposit working stations).

Press material until 1939, is currently freely available to everyone, newspapers in Swedish
until 1949, as well as certain more recent materials are available, depending on copyrights
and license agreements. In addition to the working stations at legal deposit libraries,
magazines and literature can be used in most universities and certain universities of applied
sciences, for research purposes under the Tutkain project51 contract, by logging in using the
HAKA authentication system of higher education institutions.

Other Material Services

The National Library of Finland maintains publication archive services based on open source
DSpace Software 52, for approximately 50 Finnish public sector organisations. Publication
archives include scientific publications, theses, and official publications, to name a few.




49 https://content-conversion.com/software/docworks/
50 https://www.doria.fi/handle/10024/66373
51 https://www.kansalliskirjasto.fi/en/projects/tutkain-2020-2022
52 https://duraspace.org/dspace/




                                               26
The National Library's own digitised data has been stored in three DSpace-based data
services. The materials of the National Library of Finland, published in Doria 53, contain more
than 10,000 digitised books, 8,000 small prints, 1,600 maps, 800 manuscripts, and nearly
500 sound recordings (Raita). The Fragmenta Membranea54 contains a collection of
medieval text fragments of the National Library, approximately 9,300 parchment leaflets,
described and digitised from approximately 1,500 medieval books. Fenno-Ugrica55 consists
of 20 different languages of monographs and newspapers, and has published over 1,100
monographs, over 20,000 magazine issues, and approximately 1,500 pages of manuscripts.

Development of Description

In cooperation with other national expert groups of description, the National Library of
Finland and the National Description Standard Development Group 56 introduce the
international library sector standards, which guide description, in Finland. A Description
Standard Development Group, consisting of representatives of various library sectors,
participates in the translation of standards, and their communication with the National
Library's Cataloguing Standard Service. The group also responds to international requests
for comments on standards in Finland, and forwards the development proposals of the
partners to international development networks.

In addition, the group serves as a descriptive standard competence sharing forum for
libraries and other cultural heritage organisations. For descriptive standards, the group's
steering responsibility covers the RDA description instructions, ISBD rules, the International
Cataloguing Principles, and the LRM conceptual reference model and its derivatives. The
RDA description instructions are also used in archives and museums for describing actors.

Finna

Finna57 is a versatile service package that offers cultural and scientific materials broadly to
everyone. Finna is a joint service of cultural heritage organisations and includes more than
400 museums, libraries, and archives. The core of Finna's data resources is its index, which
contains information on over 16 million archive, library, and museum material. In addition
to the materials, services related to the organisations' materials have been integrated in
Finna.

Finna services provide the Time Machine entity with an opportunity to build collaboration
with several organisations at once. This cooperation includes, in particular, usability work,

53 https://www.doria.fi/
54 https://fragmenta.kansalliskirjasto.fi
55 https://fennougrica.kansalliskirjasto.fi/
56 https://www.kiwi.fi/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=50170398
57 https://www.finna.fi/?lng=en-gb. Interviewees Susanna Eklund and Erkki Tolonen, 2 September

2020.


                                               27
where the opinions of the users of organisations' materials is brought up, the discovery of
materials is enhanced, and their use facilitated. In addition, the materials’ joint information
assets, which have been enriched and normalised, provide opportunities for building a
variety of services.

By Finna, descriptions have been harmonised and interfaces developed for various GLAM
sector systems. These interfaces could be utilised and further developed, in order to import
the metadata of Finnish organisations into different Local Time Machine services, to avoid
each organisation having to build its own interface for LTM services.

According to the Finna Services vision 2025 58, Finna creates solutions for learning and
research, and offers ways to combine information into new entities. Furthermore, Finna
offers smart ways to find information, and personalises information retrieval, in a secure
way. Finna also aims to support IIIF and 3D materials. All of these objectives could be
promoted by the development work carried out under the Time Machine project. Further
development of the Finna Classroom, links to open learning materials, and development in
supporting lifelong learning, could also provide a framework for Time Machine
cooperation.

The Time Machine project focuses on new ways of making materials available, such as 3D
and virtual applications. Cooperation with Time Machine could bring new ways for Finna
to make materials available, that cannot be implemented within the frames of normal
funding of Finna. The Finna Street Search and sustainable development solutions that serve
Finna, could be promoted through Time Machine cooperation, as well. Similarly,
technologies developed within the Time Machine framework could offer new opportunities
for processing Finna's extensive data resources, for example through artificial intelligence.

Open Interfaces and Linked Data

Finna has a harvesting interface (OAI-PMH), which enables the harvesting and processing
of the entire content of the Finna index as a mass. Also several other information systems
in the National Library of Finland (e.g. Digi, Doria, Finto, and Melinda) offer material dumps
and/or open interfaces, through which data can be accessed. A comprehensive and
accurate list of open data and interfaces can be found in the National Library's data
catalogue59, which is developed especially from the perspective of the needs of
researchers.

The National Library of Finland possesses extensive knowledge of the theory and standards
of linked data. For example, the National Library of Finland is involved in an international



58 https://www.doria.fi/handle/10024/177027
59 http://data.nationallibrary.fi




                                              28
ShareVDE project, that builds a joint linked data infrastructure60 for libraries, which could
possibly be expanded and further developed within the framework of Time Machine.

The Linked Fennica is a dataset and online service, based on linked data formed by the
Finnish National Bibliography Fennica, that has converted the original record-based
bibliographic data into a network format (Knowledge Graph) consisting of interlinked
entities.

Ontologies

Finto61 is a service promoting the interoperability and use of linked data, and developing
glossaries and ontologies, as well as software that enables their use. Finto ontologies, such
as the General Finnish Ontology YSO, and the ontologies of specialised fields linked to it,
create a network of machine-readable data that can be utilised in extracting information
from the materials.

Finto ontologies combine concepts and data content from different fields, and act as a link
when developing interoperable and multidisciplinary services. Often multilingual, Finto
ontologies enable information retrieval across language boundaries in various search
systems. Finto ontologies are already widely utilised in the GLAM sector and, for example,
in public administration agencies.

Skosmos62 is a publication platform for linked data glossaries and ontologies, developed in
the Finto service. Skosmos enables open and machine-readable publication of Knowledge
Organisation Systems, in such a way that the contents are easily linked and utilised,
regardless of sector-specific formats. Skosmos is utilised by several international
organisations, research projects, and universities.

Finto’s ontologies could be further developed, for example, through various event and
actor ontologies. These ontologies and the solutions for automated description by the
National Library of Finland, could, in the future, be utilised to automatically extract
extremely rich data content, that users could complement. By increasing the
multilingualism of ontologies, the materials of different language areas could be made
more widely available, and the construction of services across language boundaries would
be facilitated.




60 https://www.share-vde.org
61 https://finto.fi/en/
62 http://skosmos.org




                                             29
Automated Document Description

Annif63 is an automated document description tool based on language technology and
various machine learning models. Its purpose is to enable automated indexing and
classification of materials. Annif will be taught with existing text material, based on which
it will also learn to recognise keywords or categories from new material. Annif is
multilingual, and is not bound to a specific glossary, but can be adapted to different types
of classification tasks by selecting appropriate algorithms and pre-processing methods.

Annif has been utilised in the Finto AI service64, which provides an automated document
description service, especially meant for Finnish document describers. With Finto AI,
automated document description, in accordance with the YSO, can be executed in three
different languages (Finnish, Swedish, English). Annif is an open-source software that has
been utilised worldwide.

Automated subject indexing has also been developed in cooperation with CSC, as part of
the High Performance Digitisation project65, which is described in more detail in the CSC
chapter on page 59. Annif software serves as an automated subject indexing and
classification tool in the annotation pipeline developed in the HPD project.

In the framework of Time Machine, Finto AI and automated description services could be
further developed to perform, for instance, bibliographic descriptions, in addition to
document descriptions. In the same context, image recognition and automated description
would also be an interesting development direction.

The NewsEye project66 builds tools for the processing of historical newspaper material by
means of machine learning. Among other things, the project develops text recognition,
article extraction, name extraction, and topic modelling, and creates a personal digital
research assistant. The project results may be maintained by the READ cooperative67, which
also provides related services (e.g. improving text recognition and extracting articles).

Research Services

In its Digital Open Memory project (DAM)68, the National Library of Finland develops its
data-related research services69. The aim is to increase the role of the National Library of

63 https://annif.org
64 https://ai.finto.fi/?locale=en
65 https://www.digime.fi/2020/09/29/high-performance-digitisation-hankkeella-vauhtia-

digitaalisten-aineistojen-kuvailuun/
66 https://www.newseye.eu
67 https://readcoop.eu
68 https://www.kansalliskirjasto.fi/en/projects/digital-open-memory
69 https://blogs.helsinki.fi/thinkopen/kansalliskirjasto-dam-hanke/




                                               30
Finland from the service provider to an interactive partner in research. Based on the results
of the project, it will be specified in more detail, which data services the National Library of
Finland will continue to provide as its own basic service, and which will be provided through
other channels, such as the Language Bank of Finland or the FIN-CLARIAH infrastructure,
which is under construction. Key questions will be the enriched data produced in the study
and its integration into existing services, especially as part of the digi.kansalliskirjasto.fi
service.

Various research projects have developed, for example, the automatic classification of
images in historical newspapers, the extracting of names from materials, and text
recognition, as well as published a large number of related articles. Development work
related to name recognition has also been carried out on the basis of the FINER of the FIN-
Clarin consortium70, which is based on the NER software 71, originally developed in Stanford.

The functionalities developed on the basis of the study have been brought to the
digi.kansalliskirjasto.fi service, and the related teaching materials have been published as
open data72. In addition, related instructions, and examples of how to process files in the
ALTO format have been published 73. Raw data packages are available from newspaper and
magazine materials, and these can be downloaded through the National Library of Finland's
Data Catalogue or the open data website74 of the digi.kansalliskirjasto.fi service. A pilot self-
service tool75 has been created for researchers to download data packages.

Europeana

Time Machine project and Europeana have a cooperation agreement 76. The National
Library of Finland acts as the national aggregator77 of Europeana, and transmits material
from Finnish archives, libraries, and museums to Europeana. For this purpose, the National
Library of Finland maintains the Formula service. The National Library of Finland and the
organisation using the Formula signed an agreement on the delivery of metadata to
Europeana. The National Library of Finland, in turn, has entered into a Data Exchange
Agreement with Europeana. The data descriptions of the materials are converted from the
original format to Europeana Data Model (EDM) metadata. The Formula service currently
supports conversions from LIDO, EAD, MARC, and Dublin Core formats.


70 https://www.kielipankki.fi/organization/
71 https://nlp.stanford.edu/software/CRF-NER.html
72 https://digi.kansalliskirjasto.fi/opendata?set_language=en
73 https://github.com/NatLibFi/digitalia-notebook
74 https://digi.kansalliskirjasto.fi/opendata/submit
75 https://natlibfidigi.gitlab.io/gitbook/
76 https://pro.europeana.eu/post/europeana-and-time-machine-join-forces-for-a-partnership-

promoting-the-future-of-european-cultural-heritage
77 https://www.digime.fi/en/availability/europeana/




                                                 31
National Museum of Finland
The National Museum of Finland78 operates as part of the Finnish Heritage Agency79, under
the Ministry of Education and Culture. The activities of the National Museum of Finland are
regulated by law. The National Museum has Finland's largest and oldest culturohistorical
collections. They contain approximately 550,000 objects, which are the responsibility of the
museum's collection and research unit and the Collection Centre. The objects describe
Finland's history, folk culture, the culture of Finno-Ugric peoples, and world cultures on
different continents. The National Museum of Finland also documents modern culture in
Finland. The National Museum of Finland operates in a total of ten sites, and the museum's
collections are also displayed in other museums.

The collections of the National Museum of Finland are systematically and actively
accumulated. The museum's task is to record the history and reality of all citizens, their
memories and objects – regardless of gender, religion, ethnic background, or sexual
orientation. The National Museum's strategy is to make collections accessible to the public
in a more multichannel way, by utilising new technologies, and developing new operating
methods, as well as by promoting the mobility of collections. The aim is to engage in
collection work and preservation in interaction with different audiences, by involving the
audience in new forms of operation and on various online platforms.

Digital Collection Website

A Digital Collection section 80 has been opened on the website of the National Museum of
Finland, to present already digitised materials curated by theme, together with information
and stories related to the objects. In the first phase, the site has about 200 items opened
with CC licenses for the most open use possible. The site covers five themes: faces,
transition rites, clothing, animals, and the sea. The site also offers entertaining elements,
for instance, puzzles can be built from objects and they can be coloured.

In the future, theme content will be produced both curated by researchers and according
to the wishes of the audiences. In addition to the themes, the website contains a separate
section for the objects displayed at the National Museum of Finland exhibitions. At the
moment, the website contains articles from the National Museum's updated permanent
exhibitions: Prehistory, Otherland, and Story of Finland.




78 https://www.kansallismuseo.fi/en/. Interwee Leena Furu-Kallio, 3 June 2020.
79
     https://www.museovirasto.fi/en/
80 https://www.kansallismuseo.fi/en/digitaalinen-kokoelma-1-1




                                               32
MuseumPlus

The collection management system of the National Museum of Finland is called
MusemPlus, which contains information on the description of objects and related
attachments, such as image and PDF files. The system also contains, for example,
information on the conservation of the objects. The Finnish Heritage Agency utilises the
same system to manage its picture collections and archaeological collections.

MuseumPlus serves as a customer interface (with limited user rights) at the premises of
the Finnish Heritage Agency. Finna and the Finna views, of the National Museum of Finland
and of other units of the Finnish Heritage Agency, act as public customer interface.

3D Digitisation Project

In 2018–2019, the Finnish Heritage Agency had a 3D digitisation project funded by the
Ministry of Education and Culture. The project was divided into three work packages, the
first of which improved the interoperability and usability of digital archaeological cultural
heritage by producing and publishing consistent glossaries and concepts. The description
of archaeological cultural heritage will become more consistent by using the glossaries
produced in the work package, regardless of the operator. The second work package
planned how cultural heritage information, such as objects and images, can be
automatically transferred from the Finnish Heritage Agency’s MuseumPlus collection
management system to the Digital Preservation Service for Cultural Heritage (DPS). A tool
called Passari was developed for transferring file packages.

The third work package designed and implemented the entire process of 3D digitisation
from the selection of topics to the publication. The pilot project examined what types of
objects are suitable for 3D digitisation, how the 3D digitisation process is, what skills,
equipment, and software are needed, as well as how 3D models can be published online to
everyone. The piloting created sufficient knowledge of 3D model production processes,
and their necessity and possibilities, for the Finnish Heritage Agency and for the field in
general.

The Finnish Heritage Agency has opened a selection of 3D models online in the Sketchfab
service81. In cooperation with the National Library of Finland and other museums, the
Finnish Heritage Agency develops solutions for publishing 3D models in Finna.




81 https://sketchfab.com/Museovirasto




                                             33
Mass Digitisation

A mass digitisation development project is currently under way at the Finnish Heritage
Agency, the purpose of which is to get the collections from the Finnish Heritage Agency
increasingly online for everyone to see, experience, explore, or reuse.

The Finnish Heritage Agency has been digitising materials since the 1990s, yet only a small
proportion of the collections have been digitised thus far. Digitising collections requires a
lot of expertise and manual work. In particular, describing and entering files into the system
has taken a lot of time. The purpose of the mass digitisation project is to better integrate
hardware and software, in order to automate a part of the phases of the digitisation
process.

In the future, the mass digitisation methods developed in the project can be utilised
nationally, and they can be applied in cooperation across Europe. After the project has
been completed, the instructions for mass digitisation will be published in the avoindata.fi
(“open data”) service. The technical documentation for long-term preservation, or the
Passari service, has already been published openly in the GitHub service.

At the National Museum of Finland, digitisation is developed and coordinated as part of
the activities of the Finnish Heritage Agency. In the future, it would be a good idea to find
out how the mass digitisation of the National Museum of Finland and the Finnish Heritage
Agency could be made more efficient, with the new digitisation methods and technologies
developed in the Time Machine project. Potential development of text and object
recognition through Time Machine, automatic annotation, could promote the automatic
formation and enrichment of metadata at the National Museum of Finland and the Finnish
Heritage Agency. Additionally, the extensive and versatile materials of the National
Museum of Finland and the Finnish Heritage Agency offer excellent test material for testing
new methods and technologies.

Long-term Preservation

Alongside the mass digitisation project, the long-term preservation of cultural heritage has
been developed as a separate work package. Currently, the systems of the Finnish Heritage
Agency contain versatile information on archaeological cultural heritage and built cultural
environments, which include, for example, reports, text and image materials, and their
metadata. In the future, the data will be increased with archaeological 3D data.

The aim was to implement a technical solution that is as automated as possible, and that
will be used to transfer cultural environment information to the Digital Preservation Service
for Cultural Heritage (DPS). In 2019, the Finnish Heritage Agency produced a solution called
Passari alongside the collection management system MuseumPlus. Passari will




                                             34
automatically package and transfer image and object collection materials to long-term
preservation.

At the end of the project, all outputs of the work package, such as standard specifications,
data model, and programme code, are openly available online and can be utilised and
further developed by other organisations.

Local Time Machine

The mission of the National Museum of Finland and the Finnish Heritage Agency is to serve
the entire Finland. From their perspective, it would be important that the Local Time
Machine services (LTM) developed in Finland, would be distributed in a sufficiently diverse
manner across Finland. The National Museum of Finland and the Finnish Heritage Agency
have materials that provide opportunities for various local LTM services. The materials of
the National Museum could also be used to build links between LTM services located in
different parts of Finland, for example from the perspective of certain themes, dates, or
persons.

In addition to national projects, the National Museum of Finland and the Finnish Heritage
Agency are also interested in international projects, which utilise the materials of the
National Museum and the Finnish Heritage Agency, as well as develop their production and
further provision.


The People’s Archives
Digital Materials

The People's Archives82 does not systematically digitise documents, as there is currently no
system for the storage and distribution of digitised material to customers online. Sound
recordings have been digitised in a project-like manner for rescue purposes. If necessary,
the digitised documents and recordings are manually transferred to the client terminals.

The digital files, produced in the so-called instant digital project and in the joint projects of
Private Archives Association, are stored in the Disec83 service. They will later be transferred
to the Digital Preservation Service for Cultural Heritage. A part of the digitised material is
stored on the People’s Archives' own online data storage or external hard disks.




82 https://www.kansanarkisto.fi/in-english/. Marita Jalkanen and Pia Pursiainen, 5 June 2020.
83 https://disec.fi/in-english/




                                                35
The People’s Archives are included in the AHAA service84 for documents, and in the
arjenhistoria.fi (“history of daily life”) service85 for images and posters, which is a joint e-
portal of the Finnish Labour Museum Werstas, the Labour Archives, the People’s Archives,
the Museum of Technology, the Electricity Museum Elektra, the Helsinki University
Museum, the Päivälehti Museum, the Finnish Emigrant Museum, and the Gold Museum. It
contains extensive collections of objects and photographs related to the themes of working
life, industry, technology, science, history of higher education, the labour movement, and
social history. For the time being, arjenhistoria.fi contains only a small proportion of the
collections of the organisations. During spring 2021, the production base of arjenhistoria.fi
will be renewed from eKuva to Collecte86.

The digitised photographs of the People's Archives are also available through Finna. Some
are marked with a watermark for copyright reasons. The aim is to switch to CC licenses as
widely as possible.

Development Needs

The sharing of digitisation experiences and good practices would be needed in the People’s
Archives. A system for the reception, processing, storage, and use of digital material would
also be needed. In this respect, an AADA service (“Digital Material Management of
Archives”) has been initially planned with SKS and the Music Archive Finland.

Local Time Machine

Local Time Machine, covering the entire Finland, may be too extensive, as people's identity
is often tied to a regionally restricted location, such as a region or a city. For example, the
People’s Archives contain materials related to Vyborg, such as photographs and oral
history. In 2018, an exhibition was produced in cooperation with the Lenin Museum of
Vyborg, which was displayed in both Vyborg and Finland.


Finnish Folk Music Institute

Finnish Folk Music Institute87, which operates in the Folk Art Centre in Kaustinen, promotes
folk music and folk dance in Finland. Its main tasks include research, preservation,
archiving, information and publication activities, education and museum activities, and



84 https://arkisto.fi/ahaa-palvelu
85 http://www.arjenhistoria.fi
86 https://collecte.pics/blogi/


87 https://kansanmusiikki-instituutti.fi/en/. Interviewee Outi Valo, 3 November 2020.




                                                36
cultural policy influencing. Finnish Folk Music Institute is an accredited expert organisation
in the UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage.

Materials and Databases

The archive of the Finnish Folk Music Institute 88 is the largest Finnish archive specialising in
folk music and folk dance. The collection includes approximately 5,600 hours of sound
recordings, 1,500 hours of AV recordings, 30,000 photos, and 100,000 newspaper clippings.
The collections of the Finnish Folk Music Institute reference library include approximately
5,000 volumes, and over 2,700 audio discs, as well as a wide variety of magazines in the
field.

The reference data of the archive's digitised sound recordings, audio publications, book
and note collections, digital and digitised photographs, and the data of the musical
instrument collection of the Museum of Traditional Folk Instruments have been stored in
the Kansan ääni ja kuva (“people's voice and image”) database 89. Access to the database
requires a username and password that can be obtained by fulfilling the Terms of Use
Agreement. The digitisation of the archive collections is still ongoing.

Kaustinen Folk Fiddling Tradition

The Ministry of Education and Culture has proposed the Kaustinen folk fiddling tradition 90
to UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage list. The proposal was prepared by the Finnish
Heritage Agency in cooperation with the communities practising the tradition. As a local
tradition, the Kaustinen folk fiddling is strong and vibrant. Material related to the tradition
has been stored not only in the Finnish Folk Music Institute, but also in the Tampere Folklife
Archives, the SKS archives, and the Vaasa Provincial Archives.

The intangible and tangible cultural heritage associated with the Kaustinen folk fiddling,
could provide a good basis for a Local Time Machine service.

Pelimanni 8bit

Pelimanni 8bit 91 is a fantasy game implemented according to the style of classical game
consoles. The game is based on folk stories and violin music. The Pelimanni 8bit game,
published by the Finnish Folk Music Institute, was implemented by Jimmy Träskelin, and it
is based on the 8-bit partiture of Antti Janka-Murros. The game can be downloaded from
Apple and Google app stores.


88 https://kansanmusiikki-instituutti.fi/en/arkisto-ja-kirjasto/
89 http://kaustinen.collecte.fi/admin/login.php?page=%2Fadmin%2Findex.php%3F
90 https://kaustislainenviulunsoitto.wordpress.com
91 http://www.pelimanni8bit.fi




                                                   37
Genius Loci

Based on the materials of the Finnish Folk Music Institute, the Genius Loci service has
implemented a "Village Route of Chiming Stones”92. The Genius Loci project package93
combines research and development in humanist and social sciences, as well as ICT
development work. The tangible and intangible cultural heritage placed on the Geni Loci
website, offers residents and visitors sites for independent adventure and tourism, in
historic Central Ostrobothnia.

Genius loci (“site spirit”) is enriched by historical sites, facts, legends, and stories, as well
as content rich route packages. The project has produced nearly 900 site reports and 10
cultural heritage routes from the historical Central Ostrobothnia. The three-language
website (Finnish, Swedish, English), and its contents and IT solutions, have been built by a
working group of the Kokkola University Consortium Chydenius. Local home region teams
have also been actively involved in route planning.

Other Development Projects

The Finnish Museum of Traditional Folk Instruments 94 is currently testing a virtual joint play
with Folk Music Band Tallari (virtual glasses), and Pelimannin Penkki (the instruments to be
played are Finnish zither and harmonium, and the playing instruction videos implemented
for them).

In connection with villages in the Kaustinen area, virtual walks have been initially planned,
in which historical data, such as archive recordings and photographs, could be combined
with the map. Currently, the idea is being piloted as a poster board, which has been
implemented at the Folk Art Museum, which contains audio samples from eight different
sites.

In connection with her doctoral dissertation, Outi Valo has added the location coordinates
and utilised the OpenStreetMap application, for the Tampere Folklife Archives. The
contents of the Digital archive of Finnish Folk Tunes 95 at the University of Jyväskylä, have
also been presented map based. This material could provide opportunities for building
Local Time Machine services.



92

https://geniusloci.chydenius.fi/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=356&Itemid=551
&lang=en
93 https://geniusloci.chydenius.fi/index.php?lang=en
94 https://kansanmusiikki-instituutti.fi/en/suomen-kansansoitinmuseo/
95 http://esavelmat.jyu.fi/index_en.html




                                               38
The archives of the Finnish Folk Music Institute contain interesting materials for various
LTM services, such as those from the Skolt Sámi region.


Lingsoft

Lingsoft96 has developed its own language management tools, as well as terminology and
subject word solutions based on language structure analysis. Lingsoft technologies can, for
example, be utilised to produce various accessibility services. Named items can be
automatically identified and subject indexed using ready-made ontologies. Lingsoft
solutions are based on a Two-Level Morphology (TWOL) model, enabling the introduction
of new languages. Currently, Lingsoft offers basic text recognition in several languages, as
well as speech recognition in Finnish, Swedish, and Norwegian (Bokmål).

Lingsoft has cooperated widely with various cultural heritage materials and organisations.
For example, the book recommendations of Ellibs, belonging to the same concern, are
based on Lingsoft technology. In addition, Lingsoft has participated in national ontology
projects. The NameSampo97, in the company's internal use, is based on prototypes utilising
semantic technology, published by the Aalto University SeCo group. The Semantic
Computing Research Group (SeCo) was established at the University of Helsinki, in 2002.
Today, the research group is part of the Aalto University Department of Computer Science.
The group's research focuses on semantic technologies, such as Semantic Web, open linked
data, and smart web services, whose application areas include cultural heritage, digital
humanities, health, law, biology, administration, marketing, and learning.

Lingsoft is one of the largest language service companies in the world 98. It has provided
Finnish language translation services to the European Commission for nearly 20 years.
Within the framework of the four-year contracts concluded in summer 2020, Lingsoft will
submit the Finnish and Swedish translations of the European Commission documents until
spring 2024. Since 2018, Lingsoft has also been responsible for the provision of summaries
on EU regulations, to the Publications Office of the EU, in all official languages.

Accessibility

Lingsoft’s Speech Recognition service99 is based on a structural analysis of Finnish language,
combined with versatile language models, which can also be tailored to recognise the
special terminology of limited professional languages. Lingsoft's solution is speaker
independent and does not need to be trained separately. The solution can be integrated

96 https://www.lingsoft.fi/en. Interviewees Ossi Tuusvuori and Mervi Koivulahti, 17 June 2020.
97 https://seco.cs.aalto.fi/projects/nimisampo/
98 https://www.nimdzi.com/nimdzi-100-top-lsp/
99 https://www.lingsoft.fi/en/solutions/speech-recognition




                                                  39
with other systems through interfaces. Speech recognition can be performed in real time,
but the service also recognises existing audio files. For the Finnish Broadcasting Company
(YLE) and Sweden’s Television Stock Company (SVT), for example, speech recognition-
based subtitling has been utilised for video material.

Lingsoft's speech recognition service can be utilised to promote the accessibility of cultural
heritage materials100. Video subtitles and podcasts' text equivalents in Finnish, Swedish,
and English are created in cooperation between humans and machines. In 2018, Lingsoft
has even developed a solution based on Lingsoft's language technology, together with the
Digital and Population Data Services Agency, to enhance the linguistic accessibility of the
Suomi.fi Finnish Service Catalogue101.

MeMAD

In 2018–2020, Lingsoft participated in the EU research project MeMAD 102, which sought
methods for utilising artificial intelligence in the media sector, for example, in describing,
translating, and subtitling video material. In the project, Lingsoft focused especially on the
further development of speech recognition in Finnish and Swedish, speaker recognition,
and the subject indexing of the material. The MeMAD project is described in more detail in
the Finnish Broadcasting Company (Yle) chapter on page 72.

Local Time Machine

Lingsoft activities are not site or language-specific, therefore the technologies it develops
can be utilised in various national Local Time Machine projects. One possible LTM target
could be the "4Castles", i.e. Finland's medieval castles (Turku Castle, Häme Castle,
Olavinlinna Castle, and Vyborg Castle).

Additionally, Lingsoft is interested in LTM projects aimed at various user groups, such as
learning environments produced for schools, or the production of memories for the elderly
in a multi-sensory manner. These could utilise the accessibility services offered by Lingsoft.

Local Time Machine could join the ontology based – Finna, Europeana, and Digital
Humanities – "Suomi-pediaAR" platform, for existing digitised materials, which would
include dynamically developing customised applications such as Transkribus, Speech
Service, machine translation and semantic analysis, 3D and 360-degree digitisation and, for



100 https://www.lingsoft.fi/en/services/subtitling
101 https://dvv.fi/-/automaattisesti-parempi-suomi-fi-lingsoft-ja-vaestorekisterikeskus-parantavat-

kielellista-saavutettavuutta-kieliteknologian-avul-1
102 https://memad.eu/




                                                 40
example, AR, VR, XR, and Gamification. Users could add content according to a certain
protocol, including crowdsourcing.

Other Development Ideas

Cooperation within the Time Machine project will be facilitated by the fact that all Lingsoft
digital services have been implemented as interfaces, thus they can easily be integrated
with new or existing services. Lingsoft has long-standing expertise, and could add value to
various international projects, that develop different Natural Language Processing
technologies, such as text analysis, ontologies, speech recognition, speech production and
enrichment, as well as automatic translation.

Navigation based on natural language could be utilised in the virtualisation of museums.
For example, a virtual twin could be created from the original museum room, where speech
is used to navigate, and which can be enriched, for example, by image and sound.


Music Archive Finland

Music Archive Finland103 is a national central archive that preserves material related to
Finnish music, with the exception of art music and folk music. Music Archive Finland is an
association and non-profit private archive. It serves researchers, as well as other people
interested in the history of Finnish popular music.

Music Archive Finland collects, stores, and makes available especially unique material.
There are approximately 1,200 shelf metres of material. The collections are comprised of
some 450 personal and community archives, which consist of materials such as recordings,
videos, photos, interviews, notes, manuscripts, music magazines, contracts, and letters
handed over by music authors, researchers, journalists, enthusiasts, as well as music
communities.
Digital Materials
Music Archive Finland is a digitisation expert, whose specialist area is analogue recordings,
such as open reel tapes, C cassettes, and video tapes. Digital recordings such as Minidisc
discs, DATs, and MiniDV videos are also transferred to the Music Archive Finland’s digital
long-term preservation system.
In the early 2000s, Music Archive Finland was already involved in the digitalisation and
information management project for scientific audio archives. Even internationally




103 https://musiikkiarkisto.fi/music-archive-finland.php




                                                 41
speaking, Music Archive Finland is an expert in digitisation. It also participated in the TAPE
(Training for Audio-visual Preservation in Europe) project104 2004–2008.
Music Archive Finland currently contains approximately 50 TB of digital material. Most of
them are recordings or video recordings. Digital materials are stored in the Music Archive
Finland’s own long-term preservation system on RAID hard drives and LTO tapes. The
materials will be transferred to the Digital Preservation Service for Cultural Heritage in the
near future.
As a rule, Music Archive Finland does not own copyrights to its materials. Exceptions
include interview materials and a small proportion of photographs.
Databases
Music Archive Finland currently deploys four databases. Since 1998, sound recordings,
videos, printed notes, and note manuscripts have been described in the libraries' joint
databases, first in Viola and, since 2020, in Melinda 105. The description data will be
harvested from Melinda to Finna.
The other archive material will be described in the AHAA service106, offered by the National
Archives of Finland, which was introduced in autumn 2019. Currently, archive lists are
described in the AHAA service. In the future, the description data stored in the AHAA
service will also be displayed in Finna.
The general collection of Music Archive Finland includes a reference library, a collection of
music magazines, and an interview collection, and these are listed in the Skaala database107,
which is available through the Music Archive Finland website.
In 2020, a widely used database of the Finnish National Sound Archive, which covers all
Finnish recordings between 1901–1999, was transferred to the Music Archive Finland
server with search functions and discography data. In addition to performers, songwriters,
composers, and arrangers, pseudonyms and, for example, recordings made in a specific
year can be retrieved from the Fenno database 108.




104 http://www.tape-online.net
105

https://melinda.kansalliskirjasto.fi/F/KPC31KUVL1DKIQ9ICI26YULHLFF25PTNATVQ9L9CRS43BGUC
TX-01384?func=option-update-lng&file_name=find-b&F2=pc-
latin&P_CON_LNG=ENG&local_base=fin01_opac
106 https://arkisto.fi/ahaa-palvelu
107 https://skaala.musiikkiarkisto.fi/kokoelmat-arkistot/
108 https://fenno.musiikkiarkisto.fi/




                                             42
Open Access

Music Archive Finland has its own Open Access publishing activity109. A few research
materials have been opened in table format in the Open Data service110. Digital books have
been published on the OA website of the Music Archive Finland. Interviews and video
recordings, such as seminar presentations, have been published on the Music Archive
Finland YouTube channel111. The publishing of photographs in Wikimedia Commons is
planned to start in the near future.

AADA

The Music Archive Finland is involved in the AADA project (Digital Material Management of
Archives), the aim of which is to implement a joint service that meets the demands related
to the management of digital materials in private archives. AADA would include functions
for receiving and processing digital material, as well as for managing user copies, and
making them available for long-term preservation.

AADA would be seamlessly linked to existing joint services for availability and preservation
(e.g. AHAA, Finna, and Digital Preservation Service for Cultural Heritage). In addition, other
existing or emerging services such as SAPA, Researcher Hall Finna, and the Memoriaali
project, will be considered in the design of AADA. The AADA service follows the overall
architecture of the cultural heritage sector, and the archive sector's own reference
architecture.


Open Knowledge Finland
Open Knowledge Finland112 and its OpenGLAM group113 represent open solutions in the
cultural heritage field. The OpenGLAM group works in cooperation with Wikimedia
Finland114. The objective is to promote the utilisation of open projects, in the sharing of
cultural heritage and public participation. These include Wikimedia Foundation’s
Wikipedia, Wikidata115, and Wikimedia Commons 116, as well as OpenStreetMap 117.



109 https://musiikkiarkisto.fi/oa/
110 https://www.avoindata.fi/data/en_GB/organization/musiikkiarkisto
111 https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCaTFnLfimy0rzt8p44n70bA
112 https://www.okf.fi/fi/. Interviewee Susanna Ånäs, 8 December 2020.
113 https://avoinglam.okf.fi
114 http://wikimedia.fi
115 https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Main_Page
116 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Main_Page
117 https://www.openstreetmap.org




                                               43
OpenGLAM also promotes the utilisation of open digital environments and licenses, such
as Creative Commons118.

OpenGLAM supports memory organisations in their transition to the utilisation of open
digital environments and licenses. It aims to influence the consideration of open cultural
heritage in legislation. OpenGLAM implements projects, campaigns, and events, which
promote the publication, discovery, reuse, and enrichment of open cultural material. It
strives to promote the creation of an open and equal public debate and history writing.

OpenGLAM also supports cultural and linguistic diversity, by working to revive under-
represented languages, and to ensure responsible sharing of Traditional Knowledge, as well
as by cooperating with various language communities. For example, Wikimedia Finland
works with the Sámi communities, and influences the operating preconditions of small
language communities, in international information networks. Wikipedia in Inari Sámi 119 is
an initiative of the language community itself.

The aim of the OpenGLAM Group is to participate in the development of Traditional
Knowledge (TK) labels120 that identify and clarify community-specific rules. Traditional
Knowledge may include, for example, holy and/or ceremonial material, or gender-
restricted material. The TK Label specifications are intended to be customised by the
communities themselves, and enable indigenous peoples to determine the availability and
future use of their own traditions.

Wikidata is a project of the Wikimedia Foundation, that responds to the needs of the
cultural heritage field, for example by enabling the linking of collection data to other open
cultural heritage materials, through authority tags. Furthermore, Wikidata provides a
stable platform for preserving and processing data through community care. Wikimedia
Commons offers similar possibilities for media files. However, utilising linked data and
linking it to the data of cultural heritage organisations, is still just in the beginning at
Wikimedia Commons121.

Creative Commons Search122 collects open media files from cultural heritage organisations
into its index (CC Catalog). It enables centralised access to open media materials. Although,
OpenGLAM does not directly represent the MyData organisation 123, it still wants to
promote MyData thinking to share cultural heritage and related privacy issues.



118 https://creativecommons.org/
119 https://smn.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ovdâsijđo
120 https://localcontexts.org/labels/traditional-knowledge-labels/
121 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Commons:Structured_data
122 https://search.creativecommons.org
123 https://mydata.org




                                                44
Wikidocumentaries

Wikidocumentaries124 is a demo wiki for a "small" history, where you can gather history
traces and turn them into stories. Wikidocumentaries combines open platform information
(Wikidata), with data managed by cultural heritage organisations (Finna, Wikimedia
Commons, Flickr, Creative Commons Search, Europeana). Wikidocumentaries also provides
tools for improving content. Currently, articles can be translated between different
languages using the Content Translation tool 125. Subject indexing and image location with
Wikidata are under development. Wikidocumentaries has been launched as an Open
Knowledge project, and it will continue as an open-source community project.

Development Ideas

The OpenGLAM Group is interested in developing legislation in transforming areas (e.g.
artificial intelligence), and monitoring regulation together with Creative Commons and
other international networks of open data. The Time Machine project could contribute to
enhancing international cooperation in this area. The Time Machine network could also
promote the large-scale deployment and development of Creative Commons licenses, and
Rights Statements126, as well as MyData, in systems.

The OpenGLAM work has gained valuable experience in crowdsourcing and producing
information on open platforms, which could serve the Time Machine project. Models for
participation have been tested in Wikimedia projects (e.g. Wiki Loves Monuments127), or in
the hackathons128 of open cultural heritage. The OpenGLAM Group also plans to promote
experimental and educational activities of cultural heritage organisations under the
heading 'GLAM Lab'. Centralised GLAM Lab activities could also enable smaller institutions
to remain involved in the development of digitalisation.

The Time Machine project could promote multilingualism using, for example, Wikimedia
technologies. The Sámi community is Europe's only indigenous community; therefore it
plays a key role in studying the models of sharing Traditional Knowledge, in the digital
world. The OpenGLAM group is planning to launch a joint project with the National Library
of Finland, to support the Sámi languages of Finland.


124 https://wikidocumentaries-demo.wmflabs.org
125 https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Content_translation
126 https://rightsstatements.org/en/
127 http://wlm.wikimedia.fi/en/about-the-contest/
128 See for example https://summit.creativecommons.org/hack4openglam-dashboard/#/




                                              45
Päivälehti Archives and Museum
Materials

In the Päivälehti Archives129, the materials have been described and preserved in the Yksa
service130, offered by Disec. Since spring 2020, older digitised material with no restrictions
on use has been published in Yksa. In the future, the Yksa materials will also be available in
Finna.

An internal magazine and image database of Sanoma is also used, which contains a large
number of materials that are not publicly available. These include an abundance of
photographs and AV materials. The majority of the digitisation of archive material has been
outsourced, but photographs are also digitised independently.

The collections of the Päivälehti Museum 131 are stored in the Collecte system132, through
which they have been published in Finna. The museum collections are digitised
independently, and described, in accordance with the instructions of Collecte and Finna.

With regard to the digitisation of museum collections, participation in the joint project of
3D digitisation133 has been made, which includes the Postal Museum, Forum Marinum,
Päivälehti Museum, Finnish Railway Museum, Mobilia, and the Museum of Technology.
Each museum has described and modelled museum objects for education and exhibition
use, as well as produced applications for their 3D models. 3D modelled materials can be
used in teaching, research, and recreational activities. The finished 3D material has also
been productised as sales products for museum shops. The 3D models have been published
in the Sketchfab service134, and will later be published in Finna.

Development Needs

More extensive cooperation would be needed from the perspective of the technical
solutions of digitalisation and the processing of digital material. One of the possibilities
highlighted was that Time Machine cooperation could also be participated as a broader
group, through Collecte or Yksa, for example.


129 https://www.paivalehdenarkisto.fi/in-english/. Interviewees Johanna Mieto and Janne

Ridanpää, 26 August 2020.
130 https://disec.fi/in-english/
131 https://www.paivalehdenmuseo.fi/en/. Interviewee Saila Linnahalme, 26 August 2020.
132 https://collecte.pics/blogi/about/
133 https://trafiikki.fi/best-practices-and-practices-for-3d-storage-of-museum-objects/
134 https://sketchfab.com




                                              46
New technical solutions for the processing of digital material could, for example, offer
opportunities for automatic anonymisation of the materials, in which case materials that
are currently limited to demonstration or use could also be made available.

Supporting Research and Education

Promoting research and education is a key aspect. The Päivälehti Archives and Museum’s
asset is its diverse customer base. Archive materials are utilised especially by researchers,
while the museum has various customer groups, perhaps the most important of which are
schoolchildren. What creative new ways, such as games, could be used to highlight cultural
heritage and attract new customers? It would be important to involve future end users in
the planning of Time Machine.

Local Time Machine

In implementing Local Time Machine, the goal must be sufficiently ambitious. A thematic
or location-specific approach could help users better understand, how many organisations
can have fragmented material, related to a specific theme or location. A perspective related
to a certain group of users, such as schoolchildren, could also be a meaningful starting
point. For the Päivälehti Archives and Museum, themes related to media, or printing, and
newspaper history are interesting.


Muisti Centre of War and Peace
The Muisti Centre of War and Peace 135, which opens in spring 2021, is a science centre that
in its interactive exhibitions depicts war to promote peace. The Muisti Centre of War and
Peace Ltd, public utility company is responsible for the operative activities of Muisti, with
its areas of responsibility the marketing and development of the Centre's services, the
implementation of exhibitions describing the phenomena and impacts of war and peace,
as well as the provision of the Centre's services (learning materials, events, shop, and
conference services).

Virtual Combat Experience

The virtual combat experience136 offered by Muisti, is an internationally unique service, in
which a visitor to the exhibition can use the virtual experience to get to the front line of the
battles. The aim is to create a war experience that is as realistic as possible, in order for a
present-day guest, living in peace, to identify with what the soldier who fought in the front

135 https://www.muisti.org/?lang=en. Interviewees Olli-Pekka Leskinen and Pia Puntanen, 20

August 2020.
136 https://www.muisti.org/muistin-vuosi-2020/




                                                 47
line could have felt. The virtual combat experience is implemented by Teatime Research.
First, based on research, a world of February 1940 will be created.

Stories

In the Stories section137, the visitor can choose one person in whose shoes he or she walks
through the war. There are six stories to be selected from, at the opening exhibition, but
more stories are aimed to be produced every year. At the end of 2021, the exhibition
section will be supplemented by a game section, in which the exhibition visitors themselves
can influence how the story progresses.

Noheva Content Management System

Noheva138 is a dedicated content management system at Muisti, that allows staff to
manage exhibitions. Noheva also presents the contents of Muisti exhibitions in various
digital forms. Noheva works on all digital devices in Muisti (e.g. monitors and projectors),
that inform the visitor about the human being in the war.

RFID tags can provide individual experiences based on visitors' preferences and choices.
Data collection based on RFID tags, provides valuable information for the development of
future exhibitions, but the visitor also receives the collected data for themselves if they so
wish. It allows him/her to see what solutions and choices he/she has made, for example in
terms of game content, and to compare his/her solutions with the experiences and choices
of other visitors.

Before starting the Noheva development, Muisti tested more than 30 software available
on the market but was not able to find one suitable for their needs. Noheva has been
developed together with GoFore and Metatavu. The Museums of the city of Mikkeli are
part of the project, and the system will also work in the premises of the Headquarters
Museum.

Memoriaali

Muisti participates in the developing of the Memoriaali online service 139, together with
Mikkeli Development Miksei, the Central Archives for Finnish Business Records, and South-
Eastern Finland University of Applied Sciences Xamk. All participants in the Memoriaali
project are members of the Time Machine Organisation.




137 https://yle.fi/uutiset/3-11470096
138 https://www.muisti.org/noheva-mahdollistaa-muistin-nayttelyt/
139 https://www.muisti.org/memoriaali/




                                              48
From the point of view of Muisti, Memoriaali enables crowdsourcing of archive material
and data related to war history. The aim is to bring citizens' private war material alongside
public and official material. Memoriaali collects, distributes, and preserves material related
to war history in a digital archive. The first development phase of Memoriaali, began at the
beginning of October 2020, and ends at the end of 2021. So far, development has focused
on Memoriaali's key functionalities, such as file downloads and search functions.

Learning Plan

Muisti produces learning materials 140 on the themes of war and peace, for schools and
educational institutions. The aim is to encourage students to reflect on issues related to
war, peace, and humanity, as well as to guide them to critical thinking. In its learning
materials and exhibition pedagogy, Muisti relies on national curricula. At present, the
learning plan in the form of article collection is divided into two sections, the first of which
deals with the themes of war, peace, and remembrance, and the second with learning,
learners, and science centres. In the future, material on each new exhibition site will be
attached to the learning plan.


Finnish Literature Society
The Finnish Literature Society (SKS) 141 is a scientific club and a non-profit association, that
collects and preserves Finnish culture and cultural heritage. SKS has an archive and a
library, in addition to which it is the largest humanist publisher of openly available science
books, in Finland. The collections of the SKS archive contain material in the fields of
tradition and modern culture, as well as of literature and cultural history. The SKS library is
a specialised scientific library open to everyone, the key areas of which are cultural research
and literature research. SKS has a lot of content expertise, but also long-term experience
in developing digital infrastructures for cultural heritage organisations (e.g. AHAA, Finna,
and Finto).

Digital Materials

Avoin Kalevala142 (“open Kalevala”) contains two parts, the first of which includes the
poems 1−15 of Kalevala (New Kalevala), which appeared in 1849, and Lönnrot's forewords
for the New and Old Kalevala (1835). The second part contains the poems 16–50 of Kalevala
from 1849. All poems and forewords of Kalevala can be read as an image of a printed book,
transcripts of text, and fax images of a manuscript.


140 https://www.muisti.org/opettajalle/
141 https://www.finlit.fi/en. Interviewees Heli Kautonen, Outi Hupaniittu, Kirsi Keravuori, and Maria

Niku, 8 June 2020.
142 http://kalevala.finlit.fi




                                                 49
Almost all traditional Kalevala poetry, stored in archives and found in written sources, was
published in the volumes of the Suomen Kansan Vanhat Runot (SKVR) (“Old Poems of the
Finnish People”) work. SKVR has been digitised in its entirety. The database, which is freely
available, contains the entire SKVR, nearly 90,000 poems. The database also includes the
SKVR poetry directory.

The SKVR database143 relates to a broader project by the SKS, to provide large data sets
available for research in a digitised form. In addition to the SKVR publication, the unprinted
Kalevala-length poetry material of the Folk Poetry Archive has been digitised, and is
available in the archive facilities of the SKS. Runosong recordings have been notated and
transcribed in the runosong project.

In Estonia, some Estonian poetry texts have been digitised with the support of SKS. There
is an open database of poetry texts144, which is largely similar in structure to the SKS
database. Kalevala and folk poetry materials offer opportunities for international
cooperation in other respects, as well, for example, these materials can be combined with
similar international materials or services.

SKS has also published Aleksis Kivi’s Heath Cobblers, of the critical editions of Kivi, as a
digital edition145. In addition to critical editions, an extensive electronic material on Kivi's
writings, the Aleksis Kivi corpus (SKS), has been edited by the SKS, and is available in the
Language Bank of Finland146. SKS has also published the correspondence147 of Elias Lönnrot
in digital format. The web service includes letter faxes and transcripts, which have been
complemented with annotations.

The SKS website contains links 148 to catalogues and directories of SKS material, as well as
to data bases and other online sources relevant to cultural research and research in Finnish
literature. Furthermore, information packages 149 have been compiled on the SKS website,
for example in relation to Elias Lönnrot, J. L. Runeberg, and Juhani Aho.




143 https://skvr.fi/
144 http://www.folklore.ee/regilaul/andmebaas/?ln=en
145 http://elias.finlit.fi/nummisuutarit/
146 https://korp.csc.fi/
147 http://lonnrot.finlit.fi/omeka/
148 https://www.finlit.fi/en/archive-and-library-services/collections-and-information-

sources/online-information-sources
149 https://www.finlit.fi/en/find-it-web/information-packs




                                                50
Personal Histories

In addition to the actual National Biography, the National Biography of Finland website150
contains databases on economic influencers, generals, and admirals, as well as in the
Finnish clergy 1800–1920. There are nearly 6,500 biography articles in the National
Biography of Finland, and the collection is continuously updated and complemented.

The National Biography of Finland form the core material in Biografiasampo 151, which
enables the research of Finnish biographies, individuals, and groups of individuals, using
methods of digital humanities. The National Biography of Finland and other databases, a
total of approximately 13,000 biographies, have been enriched with other external
materials. The system was developed by Aalto University's Semantic Computing Research
Group and the Helsinki Centre for Digital Humanities (HELDIG) of the University of Helsinki.
In the Biografiasampo, a set of data analytical application views for data combination,
visualisation, and various analyses, have been developed on top of the linked data. In fact,
the system is unique in its diversity in the world.

Codices Fennici

Codices Fennici152 is a research and digitisation project for Finland's medieval and 1500s
manuscripts, which maps and lists all Finnish and Finnish-related pre-1600s codices, using
modern manuscript research methods. Manuscripts collected from various countries have
been digitised and published with descriptive data, in a virtual library open to everyone.
The material has also been published in Europeana.

Codices Fennici provides opportunities for both national and international cooperation. In
Finland, the key partners for the materials of the medieval and new beginning, are the
National Library of Finland (Fragmenta Membranea153) and the National Archive of Finland
(Diplomatarium Fennicum154). Latin, German, and Swedish codices open up opportunities
for international cooperation, as well.

Development Ideas

The old SKS card catalogues can be transferred to digital format more efficiently, by
developing automatic text recognition. One pilot material is the extensive oral history




150 https://kansallisbiografia.fi/english
151 https://biografiasampo.fi/
152 https://www.finlit.fi/fi/tutkimus/tutkimushankkeet/codices-fennici#.YH14qi06psM
153 https://www.kansalliskirjasto.fi/en/collections/fragmenta-membranea-collection
154 http://df.narc.fi/




                                              51
material collected by J. K. Harju, which has been copied into a card catalogue, and classified
by tradition155.

The automated compilation and/or enrichment of the metadata of books could be done,
for example, on the basis of the title leaf information, as the information on the card
catalogues of older materials, in particular, may be extremely limited. The development of
(semi)automated quality control of metadata, would also be important for the SKS.

The materials related to Kalevala could be used to build a semantic Kalevala, which would,
for example, include open Kalevala and the letters and spells of Elias Lönnrot, in XML
format. The broadside ballad material of the SKS could also offer opportunities for
international cooperation projects, as the time span of the broadside ballad material is
long, and it crosses media boundaries: it combines written and oral cultural tradition with
performance and music.

Local Time Machine

SKS contains materials for a wide range of Local Time Machine services. The SKS archive
contains materials related to Vyborg and Suomenlinna, for instance. Additionally, Sápmi
could be an interesting LTM site, if the Sámi archive and Giellavealggut were also included.
Several topical themes such as tolerance, minorities, the relationship with nature, and
climate change, could be addressed in the context of the Sápmi LTM.



Finnish Museums Association
The Finnish Museums Association 156 is a central organisation of the museum sector, with
over 200 community members. They maintain over 400 museum sites, over 300 of which
are professional museums. Museum sites include cultural history museums, art museums,
and science centres. The Finnish Museums Association is an interest representative of the
museum sector, representing museums in common questions in the field, and serving as a
cooperation network for museums. The activities of the Association are divided into
interest representation and communications services, education and development
services, as well as support services.




155 https://www.finlit.fi/fi/arkisto/perinteen-ja-nykykulttuurin-

arkistoaineistot/tekstiaineistot/paaluettelo/johan-knut-harju
156 https://museoliitto.fi/en.php. Interviewees Sampsa Heinonen, Pauliina Kinanen, Laura Kokki,

Kimmo Levä, and Janne Tielinen, 12 June 2020.


                                                  52
Digitalisation of the Museum Sector

Digitalisation in the museum sector can be divided into five stages, each of which could
benefit from Time Machine cooperation: 1) extensive digitisation of the museum
collections, 2) management of digital material, 3) making digital material available, 4)
interaction of materials with users, and 5) new applications and ways of using the materials.

Museum digitalisation has progressed to the longest extent in Finland, with regard to the
digitisation of materials. Currently, approximately 28% of object collections and 72% of art
works have been digitised. Yet, a mere 15% of photograph collections have been digitised
together with, for example, approximately 3% of natural history exhibitions. Although, the
materials have been digitised reasonably, especially in the case of art works and objects,
there is still a great need to improve the efficiency of digitisation.

In other areas of digitalisation in museums, the development has been much slower. For
example, the description of materials is easily forming as a bottleneck of digitalisation, and
the availability of data in digital format is limited. For example, only 6% of objects and 11%
of art works are available in digital form. To date, the major problem has been that
digitisation has not been granted long-term funding, and the other stages of digitalisation
have been financed even less.

Digital Material Management

For digital material management, the Finnish Museums Association offers Kookos
collection management service157. Kookos is a comprehensive solution that includes three
areas: 1) MuseumPlus collection management system, 2) a secure server space for storing
digital data, and 3) an on-call helpdesk and annual training.

Digimuseo.fi

Digitalisation of the museum sector is greatly promoted by the Digimuseo.fi service
platform158, which strives to develop and promote museum activities, cooperation
between museums, and the digital recording and availability of cultural heritage.
Digimuseo.fi brings the contents and services of museums to consumers, in a new and
inspiring way, regardless of time and place, but at the same time it offers the museums
technology and related services, for efficient operation in a digital operating environment.

The pilot version of the Digimuseo.fi platform was opened to the public in May 2020. At
the moment, there are exhibitions produced by the finalists of the Museum of the Year
2020, i.e. the Pharmacy Museum and the Qwensel House, Helinä Rautavaara Museum, and


157 https://www.museoliitto.fi/kookos
158 https://digimuseo.fi/en/




                                             53
the Finnish Museum of Agriculture Sarka, as well as the 360 model of the Presidential
Palace, and the gems of the John Nurminen Foundation collection159.

The aim is to gradually increase the number of exhibitions in the Digimuseo.fi service. The
service uses two different technologies, 360° virtual demonstrations and WebAR
technology. In the latter, the museum space is created in a virtual manner, after which
exhibitions can be created, and museum collection materials, images, sound, and videos
can be utilised. Digital Museum services are available on your smartphone, tablet, and
computer.

A museum employee can guide a group, with access to the digital museum, in virtual
rooms. This type of interactive implementation is unique at the European level, and
therefore, it provides opportunities for international cooperation, such as development
projects related to Time Machine. The virtual museum space also expands the audience
base and creates new business models.

The partners of the Digimuseo.fi platform include Arilyn, Buena, Cisco, Giosg, Insite Finland,
and Preacom. The Digital Museum is maintained by Yhteinen Perintö Oy, owned by FMA
Creations and the John Nurminen Foundation.

CREMA and Creative School

The Finnish Museums Association is a partner of the CREative MAking for Lifelong Learning
(CREMA) project160, funded through the Erasmus+ programme. The 3-year project was
launched in autumn 2019. The aim of CREMA is to develop and inspire creative activities in
adult learning between museums and maker communities. The project brings together
methods and recommendations for utilising cultural heritage materials and museum
collections, in an innovative and new manner. One objective is to create guidelines for
working with various target groups. The CREMA project involves 7 European partners.

The Finnish Museums Association is also a partner in the Creative School project161, funded
by the Erasmus+ programme. This 3-year project was also launched in autumn 2019. Its
objective is to develop learning modules utilising cultural heritage, targeted at children,
and tailored to the use of teachers, and thus promote children's self-directed learning,
together with critical and creative thinking. The Creative School project involves 9
European partners.




159 https://digimuseo.fi/en/
160 https://www.cremaproject.eu
161 https://www.creative-school.eu




                                             54
Society of Swedish Literature in Finland
Materials and Services

The Society of Swedish Literature in Finland162 (SLS) has opened its data with a CC-BY licence
in Finna. In the future, these could even be utilised in Time Machine. SLS materials contain
many handwritten documents, together with other materials, such as photos and music.
The archive also contains dialect samples with spatial data on where the sample has been
collected. Therefore, it would be possible to attach them to the map application. SLS even
has history related to Swedish geographical names, which could be combined with other
material that has been provided with geographic information.

For the identification of handwritten text, SLS has utilised the Transkribus programme 163.
Regarding this, two different models have been developed, one for identifying the
handwriting of Zachris Topelius, and the other for Albert Edelfelt. These models can be
freely distributed to other organisations.

As for Local Time Machine, SLS has interesting materials from, for example, coastal areas,
Helsinki University blocks, the old city centre, and Vyborg.

Transaction-based metadata has been collected from Edelfelt's letters164: to whom did
Edelfelt sent letters, as well as information about the recipients. Another project has
modelled the correspondence of Topelius, and people's connections with each other 165. To
define these connections, collaboration in the development of the national Finto ontology
is essential.

Development Views

SLS has used Filemaker software as both a digital materials management system and a
description tool. The system is being renewed, and consequently, various materials
management systems have been tested during 2020. Some AI modelling programmes, such
as Google's Vision AI software, have also been initially tested, even though there are few
objects in SLS materials.

The digitisation of handwritten materials is a key bottleneck. In this respect, there would
be a great need for potential mass digitisation technologies to be developed in the Time
Machine project. In addition, it would be important to link automated descriptions and


162 https://www.sls.fi/en. Interviewees Niklas Liljestrand, Johan Pyy, and Karola Söderman, 4 June

2020.
163 https://readcoop.eu/transkribus/?sc=Transkribus
164 https://edelfelt.sls.fi
165 https://topelius-m.sls.fi/#/home




                                                55
linked data to the digitisation process. At the moment, it is difficult to outsource the
digitisation of handwritten material, as it requires an understanding of the material itself,
which few service providers have.

SLS’s key customer groups are researchers and teachers at school and university level. The
third important user group is opinion leaders and decision-makers. Simulations executed
via Time Machine, could support research, teaching, and decision-making.



University of Tampere Faculty of Social Sciences
The Faculty of Social Sciences166 at the University of Tampere is a founding member of the
Time Machine Organisation.

The University of Tampere has numerous separate Digital Material Infrastructures (DI), that
have emerged at different times. Extensive digital materials have been utilised and
preserved in, for example, health science, which is part of the Faculty of Social Sciences
(health, ageing, and lifestyle-related materials, such as The Social Insurance Institution of
Finland [Kela], Statistics Finland, and S Group materials). For the administration and
development of these, the faculty has established the Tampere Enterprise for Research
Data Excellence (TERDE), under which the Folklife Archives167 is also located.

In Social Sciences, extensive materials are also comprised of EU panel surveys, the data of
which is preserved and available in the Finnish Social Science Data Archive 168 (FSD), which
is the national infrastructure for long-term preservation at the University of Tampere.

Folklife Archives

The Folklife Archives serves as its own entity in the Faculty of Social Sciences. The Sound
Archive has more than 20,000 hours of sound recordings and consists of two collections:
Erkki Alakönni's A-K collection, and the general collection which constantly growing, most
of which originate from field work trips. The Photograph Archive collections contain
approximately 200,000 photographs, which are mostly stored in negatives. The oldest glass
plate negatives are from the late 19th century.

The Collection of Manuscripts consists of private individuals' documents, minutes of
various associations, and responses to tradition inquiries, as well as approximately 60,000
wartime letters and postcards. The manuscript archive also includes collections of notes, a

166 https://www.tuni.fi/en/about-us/faculty-social-sciences. Interviewee Pertti Haapala, 14 May

2020.
167 https://sites.tuni.fi/kansanperinne/folklife-archives/
168 https://www.fsd.tuni.fi/en/




                                                  56
collection of old audio discs, and a significant collection of instruments, which is mostly
available at the Museum of Traditional Folk Instruments in Kaustinen.

Most of the Folklife Archives materials (recordings, photographs, letters) have been
digitised and are available to researchers. The materials are used especially by researchers
and students of history.

Past Projects

Already in the 1990s, a CD-ROM "Time Machine of Finnish History" was made, but it was
never published. However, the light version of it169 is available HTML encoded online. In
the 1990s, the students and Tampere museums together implemented the online service
'Koskesta voimaa’170 (“rapid power”).

A general list of Finnish inhabitants 171 (SAY) has been produced in cooperation with the
National Archives of Finland. It is a collection of materials to which data on rural houses
and their residents have been collected using the crown's accounting documents as a
source. SAY contains data mainly from Western Finland and, at its broadest, covers the
period from 1539 to 1809.

Translocalis Database

The Translocalis database is a digital history project of the Centre of Excellence in the
History of Experiences (HEX), the purpose of which is to create a digital database of Finnish
reader letters published in the magazines of the 19th century, which transmit local
experiences. In the 19th century, letters from readers have been written from local
communities across Finland, but also in the name of regions and different parts of the
country, as well as from abroad. Letters are collected using the Digital Materials service 172
of the National Library of Finland.

Each local reader letter is collected separately in the database, in order for them to be
examined in both qualitative and quantitative terms. The aim is also to combine the old
article directory collected by hand in the turn of the 20th century with a new database, in
a way that the old information serves the new. The database is initially built for research
use, where it serves as a multifaceted source of experience history. Later, the Translocalis
database will be published electronically online, which will make it useful for history
enthusiasts, as well.



169 http://agricolaverkko.fi/vintti/julkaisut/historiakone
170 http://www.history.tampere.fi/main.htm
171 http://wiki.narc.fi/portti/index.php/Suomen_asutuksen_yleisluettelo
172 https://digi.kansalliskirjasto.fi/etusivu?set_language=en




                                                  57
Other Research Projects

The University of Tampere has several research projects using digitised material. For
example, in the project "Digital History and Handwritten Sources: Digitisation, Machine-
Reading, and Historical Analysis of Wartime Letters” 173 (DIGIKÄKI) a digital research using
handwritten texts from ordinary people is carried out. The material has been a collection
of wartime letters from the Folklife Archives, which contains some 60,000 letters from
Finland during the Second World War. The digitised letters are converted into digital text
using the Transkribus programme, and a metadata base is formed. The letters will then be
analysed using new methods of digital humanities research.

The STASKO project174 built, refined, and analysed large database materials related to the
history of the Second World War in Finland. The materials are used to study the social and
cultural history of the war in a way that, in addition to numerical data, the experience and
emotional history of people, who have experienced the war, can also be captured. The new
information thus generated will also be utilised in the planning of general upper secondary
education and museum presentations. STASKO operates under the Research Centre
COMET175, in the Faculty of Information Technology and Communication Sciences.

Trivium176 is a multidisciplinary research centre of the Faculty of Social Sciences, whose
main task is to compile and promote research on societal change and long continuum from
antique to the beginning of the new era. In addition to historians, the Centre's researchers
include philologists, philosophers, and literature scientists.

Supporting Education

With digital materials, the learning situation is different from that of traditional reading.
The basic studies of museology train professionals for the museum sector. The subject of
history has had good research relationships with the Vapriikki Museum177. The perspectives
of the digitalisation of museums are emphasised in museology studies. Dozens of joint
online courses have also been produced within the framework of ”Agricola – The Finnish
Network for the Humanities”, which is an administrative project of the University of
Tampere and the University of Turku.




173 https://www.tuni.fi/en/research/digikaki-digital-history-and-handwritten-sources
174 https://www.tuni.fi/en/research/stasko-large-databases-studying-history-war-experiences
175 https://research.tuni.fi/comet-en/
176 https://www.tuni.fi/en/research/trivium-tampere-centre-classical-medieval-and-early-modern-

studies
177 https://www.vapriikki.fi/en/




                                               58
Development Needs

The mass digitisation of materials has been limited by the lack of resources and efficient
equipment. In recent years, the situation has improved through cooperation with the
National Archives of Finland. Nevertheless, there would be a great demand for new
digitisation technologies and methods to be developed through the Time Machine project,
which would allow, for example, more systematic digitisation of old population data.


IT Centre for Science CSC
CSC – IT Centre for Science 178 is a non-profit special task enterprise, owned by the state and
higher education institutions, and managed by the Ministry of Education and Culture. CSC
develops, integrates, and provides IT services, and plays an important role in the steering
and development of education, science, and cultural policy of the Ministry of Education
and Culture. CSC's main customers are the Ministry of Education and Culture and its
industry organisations, universities and universities of applied sciences, research institutes,
and public administration.

Data Centre Environment

CSC offers a versatile data management and computing environment 179, which is
interesting for the Time Machine project. Puhti180, for instance, is a general-purpose
supercluster, suitable for a wide variety of use cases, ranging from interactive data analysis
to medium simulations. A wide range of scientific software has been installed in Puhti.
Puhti’s AI section Puhti-AI is specifically aimed at artificial intelligence research and AI
applications. In 2021, a dedicated AI section, Mahti-AI, will also be opened on the Mahti
supercomputer, to complement the popular Puhti-AI.

Datacenter CSC Kajaani181 is Finland's national data computing and data management
environment. LUMI182 of the EuroHPC project, will also be located in Kajaani, and it
will be one of the world's most renowned scientific computing instruments during
its 2021–2026 life cycle. The capacity of LUMI, and other CSC computational
infrastructure, could potentially be offered, for example, for the Time Machine framework-
related development of new object recognition methods and machine learning, which
requires a lot of computing capacity.

178 https://www.csc.fi/en/home. Interviewees Aleksi Kallio (10 June 2020) and Kimmo Koivunen

(16 December 2020).
179 https://www.csc.fi/moderni-datakeskusymparisto
180 https://research.csc.fi/-/puhti?pk_vid=f557c1f35f696d6e1618556290dbc364
181 https://www.csc.fi/csc-datakeskus-kajaanissa
182 https://www.lumi-supercomputer.eu/eurohpcju/




                                              59
Automated Description

The High Performance Digitisation project183 of CSC, the National Library of Finland, and
the National Archives of Finland, concluded at the end of 2020, and was intended to create
a service for memory organisations to facilitate the processing of material. The project
developed a smart annotation pipeline for semi-automatic annotation (i.e. adding
metadata) and enrichment of archived materials, such as newspapers, books, and
documents.

The artificial intelligence annotation pipeline was implemented in CSC's supercomputer
environment, from which it can be offered as a service to memory organisations, or
duplicated into a memory organisational environment. The Annif software 184, developed in
the National Library of Finland, serves as the tool for automated subject indexing and
classification in the pipeline.

Restricted Materials

The Resource Entitlement Management System (REMS)185 offered by CSC, is an electronic
tool for managing access to research material and resources. REMS circulates the
electronically made application for a user licence for approval to the owner of the material
or his or her representative. In addition, REMS will produce the necessary reports on the
applications and the access licenses granted. REMS has been developed to manage the
access rights to biomedical materials, as part of the ELIXIR project186, hosted by CSC for
Finland. The REMS tool is also used in other branches of science.

Digital Preservation Service for Cultural Heritage (DPS)

The Digital Preservation Service for Cultural Heritage (DPS) maintained by CSC, guarantees
the long-term preservation of key national digital material resources in libraries, archives,
and museums. Digital cultural heritage material refers to both digitised cultural heritage
material, as well as material originally produced in digital form. The Digital Preservation
Service for Cultural Heritage is primarily offered to organisations responsible for the
preservation of intellectual and material cultural heritage, operating in the administrative
branch of the Ministry of Education and Culture. By the end of 2020, over 1 PB of
organisations' cultural heritage material187 has already been approved for storage in the
DPS.

183 https://www.digime.fi/2020/09/29/high-performance-digitisation-hankkeella-vauhtia-

digitaalisten-aineistojen-kuvailuun/
184 https://annif.org
185 https://www.csc.fi/rems-kayttovaltuuksien-hallintajarjestelma
186 https://elixir-europe.org
187 https://www.digitalpreservation.fi/laaturaportit/2020




                                               60
Expertise related to long-term preservation has been developed in cooperation with
organisations using the Digital Preservation Service for Cultural Heritage. For example, in
2021, CSC published a requirement specification for logical level preservation188, the aim of
which is to identify the requirements related to logical preservation, describe the tasks and
obligations associated with it: both for DPS and for the organisation that utilises them.
Similarly, in cooperation with organisations utilising the DPS, file formats and their required
technical metadata have been defined, in which the national long-term preservation
services preserve and receive materials189. In addition, material packaging 190 and DPS
interfaces191 have been defined. The specifications are updated annually together with the
organisations.

The Digital Preservation Service for Cultural Heritage is intended for Finnish organisations,
and is offered to organisations, in accordance with the decisions of the Ministry of
Education and Culture. Thus, a broader discussion on the provision of the service to foreign
Time Machine actors should take place, while considering the impacts of expanding the
funding base. However, the technological development work related to long-term
preservation, as well as the sharing and strengthening of competence, offer many
possibilities for international cooperation within the framework of the Time Machine
project. CSC already has international cooperation related to long-term preservation. It is
represented in the development of the key METS standard192 in DPS activities, and is part
of the Open Preservation Foundation (OPF) 193, which maintains validation tools (veraPDF,
JHOVE, jplyzer, and fido), for instance. CSC has also become a member of the Digital
Preservation Coalition (DPC)194, which will increase dialogue with international long-term
preservation actors, and thus contribute to strengthening CSC's ability to act as a high-
quality national Digital Preservation Service provider in Finland.


Turku University of Applied Sciences
Turku University of Applied Sciences195 has an Information and Communications
Technology (ICT) field of education 196, that includes a study path in gaming and interactive
technologies. The studies combine creativity, software-technical competence, digital


188 https://www.digitalpreservation.fi/documents/looginensailyttaminen
189 https://www.digitalpreservation.fi/specifications/fileformats
190 https://www.digitalpreservation.fi/specifications/metadata
191 https://www.digitalpreservation.fi/specifications/interfaces
192 https://www.loc.gov/standards/mets/mets-board.html
193 https://openpreservation.org
194 https://www.dpconline.org
195 https://www.turkuamk.fi/fi/. Interviewee Mika Luimula, 15 May 2020.
196 https://www.turkuamk.fi/fi/tutkinnot-ja-opiskelu/tutkinnot/Tietojaviestintatekniikka/




                                                 61
media, and project work. Application areas include entertainment and serious games, and
interactive user interfaces. Most of the studies are implemented in English.

Turku University of Applied Sciences has focused on the application of gaming technologies
in sectors other than purely entertainment. Students still have the opportunity to become
entertainment gaming entrepreneurs, but the actual research development projects are
usually outside the entertainment game industry.

Projects

Since 2009, Turku University of Applied Sciences has had a joint Turku Game Lab 197 with
the University of Turku. Turku Game Lab offers services in gaming education and
development, by utilising the latest technological development. The aim is to promote
research and the preconditions of industry in the field, as well as to improve user
experiences.

The research group led by Mika Luimula, "Futuristic Interactive Technologies” 198, strives for
extensive utilisation of interactive technologies in various sectors. The research group
works in close interaction and cooperation with business life. Innovative, interactive
technology solutions are implemented, for example, in the fields of technology industry,
well-being, education, and tourism, in cooperation with experts from various sectors. In
the centre are activities related to gamification, serious games, game-based simulations,
augmented reality, and virtual environments.

Since 2013, there have been tourism sector projects. For example, the cooperation with
the Turku Museum Centre has resulted into an augmented-reality utilising application 199
for the Turku Castle, and fair games for the Turku Fair Centre. The cooperation with Lingsoft
has produced applications located in the Turku city centre. Together with the Paavo Nurmi
Games, Suunto, and other collaborative partners, augmented reality applications related
to mobility and fitness have been developed.

Finnish-Estonian “Lights On!” joint project highlighted tourist destinations of significant
culturohistorical interest, by means of new technology. The project developed a mobile
application200, through which eight ruins of the castle in the Baltic Sea area can be accessed




197 https://www.turkugamelab.fi
198 https://www.turkuamk.fi/fi/tutkimus-kehitys-ja-innovaatiot/tutkimusryhmat/tulevaisuuden-

interaktiiviset-teknologiat/
199 https://www.turku.fi/blogit/turun-linnan-blogi/turun-linna-virtuaalisesti-lisattya-todellisuutta-

ja-tietoa
200 https://www.turkugamelab.fi/lightson/




                                                 62
through an augmented reality guidance application. The mobile application was awarded
in the Finnish Game Awards 2019 (in the Best Applied Games category)201.

The University of Applied Sciences has also developed an augmented reality platform and
mobile application, which could be offered to teachers, for example. Through the platform
and application, the teacher would be able to build places in the terrain and determine the
types of tasks, or media content, associated with them, for example by using augmented
reality. In the past, an application has usually been created for each purpose separately,
but platform-thinking opens up entirely new opportunities, also for international
cooperation.

Development Opportunities

Turku University of Applied Sciences has cooperated with Lingsoft. Multilingualism
provides countless opportunities for international cooperation. Furthermore, development
work in the semantic web sector would enhance the utilisation of European cultural
heritage. As far as Turku Castle is concerned, there have been discussions with Swedish
operators on potential cooperation projects related to Katariina Jagellonica.

FIT Turku Competence Center

In March 2021, the facilities of the Turku University of Applied Sciences introduced a FIT
Turku (Futuristic Interactive Technologies) Competence Center202, which is a joint open
research environment for companies, research institutes, and the public sector. With the
help of digitalisation, FIT Turku aims to meet the diverse challenges posed by the future. It
provides virtual training and experience solutions, as well as services for the development,
usability, and assessment of impact of virtual reality and augmented reality applications.

FIT Turku also includes a virtual training centre, where competence can be tested and
practised using virtual training applications. Turku University of Applied Sciences has built
a number of virtual training applications related to shipping, fire safety, logistics, transport,
and health care.




201 https://www.turkuamk.fi/fi/ajankohtaista/2137/vuoden-2018-hyotypeli-turku-game-labin-ja-

humakin-lights/
202 https://www.turkuamk.fi/fi/tyoelamapalvelut/palvelut/futuristic-interactive-technologies-fit-

turku/


                                                63
University of Turku
Digital materials and their processing

The University of Turku 203 has a great number of digital materials that could be used in
various Time Machine -related projects. For example, the School of Languages and
Translation Studies (SLT) has nationally and internationally unique language materials. The
Digilang project204, which is funded by the University, will develop the school's digital
materials during 2018–2021. Their usability will be enhanced, and their visibility and
accessibility will be promoted, by compiling them in a portal205 that will be functional even
after the funding period. Digilang includes the following sub-projects: Satakuntalaisuus
puheessa (“Satakunta's speech”) corpus, the regional and social variation of Finnish
language corpus (Prosovar), finnougric corpus, academic Finnish corpus, Universal
Parsebanks corpus, and LOG corpus.

History, culture, and arts studies archives are rich in materials. The archives are a TMO
member, and therefore discussed as a separate entity on page 68.

In 2019–2020, an education, research, and information project 206 for 3D digitisation of
archaeological materials, was implemented as a joint project between the University of
Turku Department of Archaeology, the Turku Museum Centre, and the Aboa Vetus & Ars
Nova Museum, with the support of the Ministry of Education and Culture. The project
examined the 3D digitisation process of archaeological discoveries, as well as the related
topical equipment, software, and methods. The aim was to map 3D digitisation solutions
best suited for various archaeological object types and users, and thus introduce 3D
digitisation as a natural part of archaeological research. During the project, archaeological
discoveries from the collections of museums and the department were 3D-digitised.

The University of Turku was also involved in the project “Computational History and the
Transformation of Public Discourse in Finland 1640–1910 (COMHIS)”, which studied public
debate in historical newspapers, as well as Finnish information production as part of
European development207. The four-year project was attended by the Centre for
Preservation and Digitisation of the National Library of Finland, the University of Helsinki
Faculty of Arts, and the Departments of Cultural History and Information Technology of the
University of Turku. The project analysed how language boundaries, elite culture, and

203 https://www.utu.fi/en. Interviewees Hannu Salmi (7 October 2020) and Erkki Sutinen (24

August 2020 and 1 October 2020).
204 https://sites.utu.fi/hiiskuttua/digilang-kehittaa-kieliaineistoja-ja-kokoaa-ne-portaaliin-

rahoitusta-myonnettiin-yli-puoli-miljoonaa-vuosille-2018-2021/
205 https://digilang.utu.fi
206 https://blogit.utu.fi/ark3d/
207 https://www.utu.fi/en/university/faculty-of-humanities/cultural-history/research




                                                  64
popular discussion, as well as the reuse of texts and channels for publication interacted.
The results of the project have been published as an open database currently on CSC's
server. This project, like other similar projects, involves long-term preservation. For
example, the discovered reproduction chains can be preserved in the Data Archive, but
how do you keep the database and its search properties alive?

A few data sets have not yet been opened at all, as a method of opening them is yet to be
found (for example, conceptual historical harvesting of Finnish and Swedish newspaper
material). The international project studied the movements of concepts and news across
borders utilising the algorithm developed at the University of Utrecht. In computational
terms, Finnish newspapers were examined to find all words corresponding to a specific
"seed word", that appear in the same semantic environments. The method is so heavy in
computational terms, that a server that is efficient enough to open the results, is yet to be
found.

Time Machine could become a framework that would compile and bring continuity to the
current project-specific approach. In Finland and elsewhere in Europe, an enormous
amount of digital material and services are produced, which will work for a while, but which
will soon be forgotten or left without long-term maintenance. Professor Hannu Salmi
noticed this personally, when writing his recent book What is Digital History?, for which he
explored an extensive amount of old digital services. They included a great deal of services
that have stopped at some point: either they still partly work or not at all. Time Machine
could help manage the current project-specific world.

Future Projects and Ideas

A project has been launched in the field of the history of audiovisual culture, involving a
group led by Mikko Kurimo from Aalto University's Department of Signal Processing, and a
group led by Jorma Laaksonen from Data Science. The aim is to apply object recognition,
image recognition, and speech recognition to all Finnish cinema material from the 1910s
to the beginning of the 2000s. In the early stages, 250 digital-format films from KAVI have
been tested.

The project could provide opportunities for international cooperation as, for example,
metadata of the Internet Movie Database is openly available. However, copyright matters
pose a major challenge. In particular, newer materials involve a large number of production
companies, which means that it may be difficult to obtain research permits. On the plus
side, copyrights with older materials are easier to manage. In Finland, KAVI is the right
holder for the older documentary materials.

Cooperation with “living memory” type network projects, such as the Yle Archives, would
also open up new opportunities. By enriching metadata, several matters could be found in




                                             65
the material that have not been detected earlier (for example, in which films the first
mobile devices were seen at European level).

Realised AR/VR Projects

The University of Turku has been involved in several virtual and augmented reality projects.
For example, the joint Futuristic History research project208 of the university and VTT
Technical Research Centre of Finland, developed technology for augmented reality for the
use of museums and historical tourist destinations, and studied business models suitable
for them. As part of the project, an adventure application located in the museum blocks of
the Turku Luostarinmäki was implemented.

The MIRACLE project209 has studied the application of mixed reality to cultural tourism and
learning outside the classroom. In addition to the University of Turku, the project has
included research units from the universities of Helsinki and Tampere and VTT, as well as
approximately twenty companies and public actors. The project has developed, for
example, a Wordsmith application, which takes you to events in the 16th century in the
Turku Cathedral, as well as a Transformations of the Knights’ Hall application, which
describes the history of the Häme Castle.

"Turku goes 1812”210 is a historical 3D environment of several simultaneous users, which is
experienced through VR glasses. Participants can navigate in the virtual world, together
with other visitors, and discuss the historical urban environment. Turku goes 1812 is based
on the modelling of the Turku Great Square and its surroundings, at the beginning of the
19th century.

In his doctoral dissertation, Digital lies or historical knowledge?211 (2019), Lauri Viinikkala
studied the potential of mixed reality technology, as a tool for speaking about the past. The
study showed that visual and hearing perceptions, together with other sensory perceptions
can convey historical information and explain how things may have appeared or sounds in
the past. Thus, presentations combining material remains of the past and digital effects can
provide more information about the past than traditional written works.

In her doctoral dissertation on hypercontextual games, Carolina Islas Sedano developed a
method for small communities and companies, to design and implement mobile games
from their own starting points. The Pielinen Museum developed a story-based LieksaMyst
mobile game212, which combines the physical environment and virtual reality. The game
can be further developed by the museum's own employees. Islas Sedano has also been

208 https://tt.utu.fi/ar/research/futuristic-history/
209 https://tt.utu.fi/ar/research/miracle/
210 https://www.turku.fi/uutinen/2019-06-13_virtuaalinen-vanha-turku-koettavissa-turun-linnassa
211 https://www.utupub.fi/handle/10024/146572
212 https://yle.fi/uutiset/3-7381922




                                                   66
involved in developing TekGame213 and TekGuide, for the Technology Museum. Islas
Cedano has an IT company Ubium214.

Local Time Machine Services

Turku and the Turku region have long been cooperating on spatial data. On the university's
side, cooperation has been derived from the Department of Geography, but the city of
Turku has also been active. For example, Turku has a lot of information obtained in
archaeological excavations. Combining it with spatial data would provide several
opportunities. Likewise, there is a lot of digitised material about the city's old history, from
the black book of the Cathedral to the reliquaries.

There are various projects in the Turku region, but the challenge is keeping the applications
they produce, available in the long term, and how to develop them further. Time Machine
could provide a framework, within which various projects and applications dealing with
Turku, could be brought together, and offered continuity.

In December 2020, a cooperation agreement has been signed to launch the Culture Campus
Turku cooperation215. The agreement was signed by the city of Turku, the University of
Turku, Åbo Akademi, Turku University of Applied Sciences, Humak University of Applied
Sciences, Turku Music Education, and Turku Science Park. City of Culture Turku cooperation
can also enhance cooperation between local actors, regarding potential Turku Time
Machine, and provide new opportunities for funding it.

Remote Presence

The Remote Presence technology 216 has been developed at the Department of Future
Technologies at the University of Turku, and under Professor Erkki Sutinen’s guidance at
the University's Future Tech Lab at Windhoek, Namibia. Remote Presence is based on a 20–
30 video cameras’ image to build a composite model, that allows you to be digitally present
in another location. The Remote Presence technology offers entirely new perspectives on
how to be present in another place and in another time. While Virtual Reality and 3D
modelling have been built beforehand, Remote Presence also enables real-time remote
presence.




213 http://tekgame.tekniikanmuseo.fi/site/index.php?lang=en
214 http://www.ubium.net/site/index.php
215 https://www.utu.fi/en/news/press-release/culture-campus-turku-to-become-a-new-platform-

for-developing-culture-sector
216 https://ftlab.utu.fi/projects/remote-presence




                                                67
The Remote Presence technology has been tested with schoolchildren 217 from the Turku
Pääskyvuori and Bangladesh Dhaka schools, as well as with students at the University of
Turku and Namibia Windhoek. A mobile unit, which can be moved to the desired location,
is under development. The aim is to support experiential presence in another location. At
the same time, an effort will be made to construct the required technology to be "invisible"
to users.

Remote Presence also enables, among other things, an experience of combining film
making and viewing. This can be done in cooperation with a well-known Namibian
filmmaker and Director of the Namibian Film Commission, Joel Haikali (Joe Vision
Production218), who has extensive African and European film contacts.

Namibia's Future Tech Lab is interesting not only for the development of new technology,
but also as a meeting place for Finnish and African science and culture. The activities of the
unit involve, for example, intercultural contractual matters, which have been worked on
with the Faculty of Law, at the University of Turku. Furthermore, the theme provides
opportunities for international cooperation with, for example, the University of
Amsterdam and Harvard.

The University of Cape Town has developed the Indegenious Knowledge System between
Europeans and Africans. For example, residents of a herero village know their houses and
objects, but they do not know how to model them in 3D. How can villagers communicate
their knowledge to international 3D designers? And how do they get hold of the developed
models, in order for them to assess the outcome?



University of Turku History, Culture, and Arts Studies Archives

Organisation, Preservation, and Digitisation Project

In 2018, began a project of organising, preserving, and digitising the materials in the
History, Culture, and Arts Studies Archives 219 at the University of Turku, and it will last until
the end of 2023. The aim of the project is to improve the findability, accessibility, and
research use of material, as well as the long-term preservation of electronic material. The
aim is to digitise all the original materials in the archives. Materials will not be disposed of
after digitisation.


217 https://www.utu.fi/fi/ajankohtaista/uutinen/virtuaalista-oppimista-ja-pallonheittoa-turusta-

bangladeshiin
218 https://www.joe-vision.com
219 https://www.utu.fi/fi/yliopisto/humanistinen-tiedekunta/hkt-arkisto. Interviewees Kirsi

Hänninen and Heli Syrjälä,18 May 2020.


                                                68
The collections of the History, Culture, and Arts Studies Archives include photographs,
manuscripts, maps, and audio tapes, as well as interview transcripts. The archives contain
a wide range of data from reel tapes to VHS cassettes, and from Minidiscs to survey
responses. A part of the archives has already been digitised in the early 2000s (for example,
the Talvadas corpus, which has accumulated from the 1960s to present day, as recordings,
transcriptions, notes, and photographs).

Additionally, the archives contain a large number of urban research materials from, for
example, Western Finland. In addition, there are a number of survey materials, that are
frequently used, and will be digitised without delay, immediately after the AV materials.
Before digitisation, the materials are mapped and catalogued.

In connection with the project, the aim is to obtain an archive information system, which
works for both archives and customers, as well as secure material preservation and storage
solutions. Experiences and operating methods accumulated from the digital project may
be shared further. The History, Culture, and Arts Studies Archives have expertise in the
formation, organisation, long-term preservation, and sharing of qualitative human sciences
research material.

The materials of the archives are often restricted only to research, education, and museum
use, based on agreements or data protection. The material contains a large number of
personal data, including material containing special categories of personal data (sensitive
data). Thus, it is not possible to open the data on a large scale.

Supporting Education

Kirsi Hänninen, who is responsible for the History, Culture, and Arts Studies Archives,
coordinates and instructs joint master's studies in the Records and Archives
Management220 of the University of Turku and Åbo Akademi. Students and researchers
could be recruited to thesis, research, and other projects related to Time Machine. Would
the Time Machine network even provide opportunities for (virtual) student, teacher, and
researcher exchanges?

The connection between the archives and university education can bring bidirectionality to
Time Machine. For example, on the one hand, archaeological research produces archive
materials that can be utilised in Time Machine, but on the other hand, the materials
presented through Time Machine can be utilised in future archaeology teaching.




220 https://www.utu.fi/fi/yliopisto/humanistinen-tiedekunta/arkistoalan-ja-asiakirjahallinnan-

maisteriopinnot


                                                69
Development Opportunities

Would it be possible to build an input platform through which, for example, students could
produce content for Time Machine, as a thesis (for example, examining small archive
material, entering data, and connecting it to a larger entity)? The work could also include
3D modelling, if easy tools are provided for it. Utilising text recognition in connection with
mass digitisation of materials, could significantly facilitate the production and processing
of metadata. The University of Turku has participated in the READ project221.

The History, Culture, and Arts Studies Archives also contain archaeological image data. In
2019–2020, an education, research, and information project for 3D digitisation of
archaeological materials, was implemented as a joint project between the University of
Turku Department of Archaeology, the Turku Museum Centre, and the Aboa Vetus & Ars
Nova Museum. The aim was to map 3D digitisation solutions best suited for various
archaeological object types and users, and thus introduce 3D digitisation as a natural part
of archaeological research. During the project, archaeological discoveries from the
collections of museums and the department were 3D-digitised. The 3D digitisations
produced were aimed at the use of scientific research and museum work, i.e. the
visualisation of archaeological discoveries to the general public.

Ajan Koneet (“Machines of Time”) Collective222 operates in the field of science and art, in
the area of the Tuorla Observatory. Artefacts and archive material created through
astronomical research are used to examine and interpret the essence of time. Among other
things, the project interviewed the Tuorla community, and listed the museum objects, that
describe the history of astronomy in Finland and Turku. There are astronomical measuring
points around Turku, and a city trail has been designed around them, with art located in
these sites. Through the Tuorla community, there are contacts with Estonia, the Nordic
countries, and European observatories and the departments of astronomy.

The city of Salo has a smart city project in cooperation with Lounea and the University of
Turku Department of Future Technologies. The aim of the project is to produce researched
information on human-centred smart city planning, the cyber security of smart city
solutions, and the transfer of information required by a smart city. The project also
implements capstone projects on smart cities, in student groups. Based on the research
results, concrete development and solution proposals will be presented to Salo.

Local Time Machine

The History, Culture, and Arts Studies Archives could produce stories of its material, such
as buildings, railways, and events, within the limits set by its agreements and the Data


221 https://readcoop.eu
222 https://blogit.utu.fi/ajankoneet/




                                             70
Protection Act. For example, how was a wedding party attended in the early 20th century?
Photographs may also contain material to be published in Time Machine (for example,
Turku community garden photographs collected by the Department of Museology). The
archives also contain, for example, maps, construction drawings, village drawings, and
industrial area drawings. A few wooden house blocks have been documented in an
incredibly detailed manner in free-form field work.


Labour Archives
Digitisation, Description, and Deployment

In the Labour Archives223, the digitisation of extensive document material is mainly
outsourced, but, when necessary, documents have also been digitised on a small scale, by
the archives themselves. Archive materials are described, and electronic materials are
stored in the Yksa service224, provided by Disec. Additionally, the long-term preservation
services for digital materials are also purchased from Disec. Yksa's latest version will offer
an interface for exporting descriptive information to Finna.

The Labour Archives have digitised photographs and posters by themselves. Recordings
have also been digitised, mainly oral history recordings or conference recordings. The
Labour Archives also contain interview videos. Photographs and posters are described in
the Collecte system225, from which they are available to customers via arjenhistoria.fi 226
(“the history of daily life”) and Finna services.

The Labour Archives have produced learning materials 227 for schools and other interested
parties, both independently, as well as in cooperation with the People's Archives and the
Finnish Labour Museum Werstas. The aim is to provide an opportunity to easily examine
archive materials, and to utilise them, for example, in history teaching. The production of
learning materials was related to the extensive Museum of Liberty project228. The Labour
Archives materials can be used to produce teaching material in the future, as well.

Development Needs

The broad opening of data sets is restricted by data protection, as the data contains a great
deal of personal data, as well as special categories of personal data (sensitive data). The


223 https://www.tyark.fi. Interviewees Petri Tanskanen and Petri Marjeta, 19 August 2020.
224 https://disec.fi/in-english/
225 https://collecte.pics/blogi/about/
226 http://www.arjenhistoria.fi
227 http://www.tyovaenliike.fi/kouluille/oppimateriaaleja/
228 http://www.werstas.fi/event/vapauden-museo/


                                               71
opening of data could be significantly promoted if personal data could be automatically
identified. The Labour Archives has monitored the READ project229, but for the time being
no identification of handwritten text in connection with digitisation has been done.

As a rule, the material is not described in more detail in connection with the digitisation,
but the description is based on the description of the analogue material already carried out
earlier. The spatial data of photographs is described in more detail, but the spatial data of
documents is mainly described at the level of the records creator. The automated
compilation of keywords and spatial data would be of great benefit to the findability of the
material.

Thus far, only a small percentage of the material has been digitised. From the point of view
of the Labour Archives, it would be of greatly beneficial, if the mass digitisation of
photographs and documents could be enhanced through technological development
within the framework of Time Machine.

Local Time Machine

The Labour Archives serve the entire Finland, therefore, from its point of view, it would be
important to present a national perspective in the development of the Local Time Machine
services. Then again, the Labour Archives contain material for various Local Time Machine
services, based on a specific location or theme. The materials contained in the Labour
Archives highlight the history of ordinary people, popular movements, and association
activities, making them well complement the data on authorities or notable persons in
other archives.

The Labour Archives contain oral history data and photographs concerning Suomenlinna
prison camp. In cooperation with the People's Archives, an exhibition on the year of 1918
in Suomenlinna was organised, in connection with the Suomenlinna tourist information
and the HSL waiting room.


Finnish Broadcasting Company Yle Archives

Digital Materials

The Finnish Broadcasting Company Yle 230 has strong expertise in the digitisation of AV
material, as recordings, videos, and film material have been digitised for over a decade.
The Yle Archives contain a wide variety of digital material, but access rights are often

229 https://readcoop.eu

230 https://yle.fi. Interviewees Tuomas Nolvi and Elina Selkälä, 29 May 2020.




                                                72
restricted. A part of the material is not licensed at all, and a part can only be used in Yle's
own activities. More extensive opening of the materials always requires clarification and
negotiations with authors.

Up to date, only a small percentage of the material has been opened. The material is
divided into four types:

    •   Digitised old film material for which Yle owns all the rights. Of these, over 200 clips
        have been published in Vimeo231.
    •   Photos have been published in Flickr232, but Wikimedia Commons233 will be used in
        the future. There are over 200 published photos, which is only a small part of Yle’s
        photo collection.
    •   Sound effects to which Yle owns full rights. These can be used, for example, to
        produce various soundscapes. Sound effects have been published in Freesound234.
    ●   A part of the metadata in the archive databases has also been opened pilot based.

Projects

Methods for Managing Audiovisual (MeMAD) 235 is an EU-funded three-year project, in
which Aalto University, University of Helsinki, Lingsoft, Limecraft, University of Surrey,
EURECOM, and INA have been involved, in addition to Yle. The project developed methods
to automatically produce a text description of video events and speech. The artificial
intelligence system can be taught to improve its results by comparing the descriptions
produced by the method and by people. The method is able to combine both speech and
image content when making a description, and it produces text directly in the desired
language. One teaching material used in the project, was video archive materials from Yle.

The automated description of audiovisual content significantly promotes the processing of
large video collections, for example in media companies, and enables the recycling and
application of previously produced material for new purposes. In addition, text descriptions
and searches based on them, facilitate the findability and accessibility of the material,
especially for people with poor hearing and vision. MeMAD ended at the end of 2020. The
Time Machine network could provide an opportunity to continue the MeMAD
development and share the project results.

EUscreen236 is a website that provides free access to European television cultural heritage,
through videos, articles, pictures, and audio. Material has been obtained from European

231 https://vimeo.com/ylearkisto
232 https://www.flickr.com/photos/ylearkisto/
233 https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Finnish_Broadcasting_Company_Yle_Archives
234 https://freesound.org/people/YleArkisto/
235 https://memad.eu
236 https://www.euscreen.org




                                                73
audiovisual archives and television companies. EUscreen is in contact with Europeana.
EUscreen harmonises the heterogeneous collections in Europe, and encourages different
user groups to explore cultural and television history. For Time Machine, a functional
connection to EUscreen can bring added value, and help reduce duplication.

Local Time Machine

Yle Archives contain a wide range of material for Finnish Time Machine projects, focusing
on different locations, theme entities, or user groups. A part of the material is easier to
access, but negotiations often need to be conducted to obtain the necessary rights. Yle
Archives contain, for example, topical and news films on a variety of themes. There is a
great deal of materials available on public figures, politics, and the entertainment world,
among others. Yle’s own history and technology have also been comprehensively
documented.

One example of the expertise of Yle with regard to Time Machine projects, is an interactive
online article based on 3D modelling, from Puotinharju shopping centre Puhos 237. The
entity enabled navigation through the three-dimensional Puhos, using arrow keys or the
touch screen, and at the same time, it was possible to hear interesting stories told by
people working in the shopping centre. Puhos' interactive 3D model was implemented in
cooperation with Aalto University, and the video content was produced by the Svenska Yle
Spotlight.

Utilising Time Machine Results

Time Machine could offer new opportunities for creative operators and journalists. How
could materials be presented in a new and creative way? When examining the content
offered by Time Machine, from the perspective of media companies and journalism, what
kind of confluence does it give to cultural history, the past, and perhaps the present? While
Yle could offer digital content to Time Machine, it could also utilise the digital material
produced in the project, in its own activities.

Regulatory Development

The Time Machine organisation could collaborate to develop the regulation of digital
cultural heritage, for example in the field of data protection and copyright. It would be
important to be able to influence regulation in such a way, that archive materials could be
opened up more extensively than before – while respecting copyrights.




237 https://yle.fi/uutiset/3-9891171




                                             74
Mikael Agricola Society
Important stakeholders, such as the Finnish National Agency for Education, the Church of
Finland, the National Archives of Finland, and universities, are represented in the Board of
the Mikael Agricola Society238 established in 2006. In connection with the 2007
anniversary239 of Agricola and after that, a large number of Agricola thematic publications
of various disciplines have been produced, especially by SKS and the University of Turku, in
addition to Simo Heininen's "Mikael Agricola – elämä ja teokset" (“life and works”)
biography, published by Edita. A part of the publications were popular, while others were
more scientific. The diverse contents of the Finnish National Agency for Education 240 and
Yle241, also present the lifework and era of Agricola in a multifaceted manner, for example,
the three-part history document series “Agricolan jalanjäljillä” (“following Agricola's
footprints”)242. Cooperation with museums, for example, has also been active. The experts
of the society have contributed to the implementation of the contents. Since 2008, the
Agricola Society has managed projects and materials, produced in connection with the
anniversary year, and has strived to develop them further.

Databases, Events, and Services

The Syntax Archive of the University of Turku contains the scientific edits of Mikael
Agricola's works, and a morphosyntactic database243, developed in cooperation with the
Institute for the Languages of Finland, in 2004–2007. The database contains a corpus of old
written Finnish, with almost 40,000 sentences, over 80,000 clauses, and over 400,000
words, containing all the Finnish-language parts of Mikael Agricola's nine works. The
database is morphologically and syntactically annotated.

In 2017, the Reformation anniversary year, the “Agricolan ajan Turku” (“Agricola’s Age
Turku”) application244 presented the 16th century Turku, and sites related to Mikael
Agricola's life, in authentic historical places. The application has been available for Android
and iOS platforms. The application includes 1) a map view of Turku centre, in which
different places and events can be embedded, 2) a target menu, where the user can read
text clips related to the sites, and view 3D models of objects related to the history of the
sites, 3) a topical view of current and Agricola-related events and news, and 4) a glossary
view, consisting of a vocabulary on Agricola, a timeline, and a quiz. The implementation

238 https://www.mikaelagricolaseura.fi. Interviewees Kalle Järvelä, Erkki Sutinen, and Ossi

Tuusvuori, 24 August 2020.
239 https://agricola.utu.fi/mikael/agricola2007/translations/english/index.html
240 https://www.oph.fi/fi/koulutus-ja-tutkinnot/mikael-agricolan-elama-ja-tyo
241 https://yle.fi/aihe/artikkeli/2013/02/07/mikael-agricolan-paiva-94
242 https://areena.yle.fi/1-3932665
243 http://urn.fi/urn:nbn:fi:lb-20140730170
244 https://www.lingsoft.fi/news/agricolan-ajan-turku-sovellus-tuo-reformaatioajan-turun-

kaikkien-ulottuville


                                                 75
serving tourism and phenomenon-based learning, for example, has involved Turku
GameLab, Plush POP soft, and Lingsoft. The application is designed in a way, that its content
may be changed in the future, without modifying the application itself. Furthermore, the
development has considered the fact that support for languages other than Finnish, can be
added, with little effort.

The Agricola Society has regularly participated in the Turku Book and Food Fair, by
producing programmes, as well as in its department. In 2007, as part of the anniversary
year of Agricola 2007, the Agricola-themed Turku Menu competition was organised in
cooperation with Turun Keittiömestarit (“Turku chefs”), the society has also organised
Agricola-themed food culture events, and, in addition, the Agricola beer245 was launched in
cooperation with Laitilan Wirvoitusjuomatehdas. The lessons and advice provided by
Agricola, regarding herbs, for instance, have been extracted from his Kalendarium and
published on, for example, the Mikael Agricola Society Facebook246.

Starting in 2019, Mikael Agricola Society also has a project aimed at reviving and developing
“the Seven Churches Tour”247, known as Finland's oldest tourist route, by utilising modern
technology. The tour, which was launched by the Southwest Finland Tourist Association in
1938, introduces you to the churches of Askainen, Lemu, Masku, Merimasku, Nousiainen,
Naantali, and Raisio. In the project, the Seven Churches Tour is taken into electronic form.
The project will increase public interest in the route, and may be useful in school teaching,
for example. The project will be promoted through a grant from the Southwest Finland
Regional Fund of the Finnish Cultural Foundation. In spring 2021, the society also applied
for funding from the Ministry of Education and Culture for its development project for
cultural tourism, "Aikamatkalla Agricolan ajan Suomeen” (“Time travel to Finland in the
Agricola era”)

In 2020, a lecture series, “Retkiä Agricolan maailmaan” (“Trips to Agricola's world”) was
implemented together with the National Archives of Finland and Aboa Vetus. The lectures
have been recorded on video.

Future Plans

Text recognition, and AI-based processing of recognised text, offer new possibilities for
examining old handwritten documents from the Agricola era. How, for example, will the
old language be brought into the form of the current language understandably? A project
has been under way, with the University of Helsinki Almanac Office, in which Agricola's old
calendar would be brought to the present time, through a mobile application or an



245 https://laitilan.com/2016/11/laitilan-uutuus-kunnioittaa-suomea-ja-suomen-kirjakielen-isaa/
246 https://www.facebook.com/mikaelagricolaseura
247 https://turunseutusanomat.fi/2019/11/seitseman-kirkon-reittia-heratellaan-eloon/




                                               76
application platform. The society has cooperated closely with the city of Turku, and the
Turku and Kaarina Parish Union.

The Remote Presence technology, developed at the University of Turku, offers
opportunities for new digital experiences. The technology is described in more detail on
page 67, in connection with the University of Turku. Mikael Agricola Society has been
interested in how to bring memorability into the new technology. For example, how could
remote communion and remote sacraments be implemented? The original Reformation in
the 16th century was based on printing technology. What would be Reformation X.0 based
on interactive digital technology?

In the teaching series of Agricola's school years, the career of Agricola could be followed,
for example, until 1528, when he left Vyborg, to become a secretary of the Turku Bishop.
The school years of Agricola could also be linked to the 800th anniversary of Turku, in 2029.

Agricola’s material related to plants and food heritage, could be utilised more widely, with
the help of modern technology. A physical event, related to the medieval food culture, has
also been planned as a cooperation project, but the implementation has been shifted due
to the pandemic situation. In relation to old folk tradition and food culture, even European
cooperation could be possible.

Mikael Agricola Society can bring together researchers and experts from various fields.
Correspondingly, research results can be simplified from the society's side, and brought up
in various environments. For example, the society has considered, how Martti Rautanen,
Mikael Agricola, and Aleksis Kivi could meet in digital space. Martti Rautanen arrived in
Namibia in 1870, the same year as the book Seven Brothers was published. He became a
multidisciplinary researcher and language structure developer, who spoke 11 languages
and translated the Bible. One possibility would be to make an interactive film of Rantanen,
in which case various digital material could be included. The Nakambale museum 248 in
Namibia, is one of the few museums presenting Finnish cultural heritage. Professor Erkki
Sutinen, a member of the Mikael Agricola Society's board of directors, leads the remote
campus of the University of Turku, at the University of Windhoek.

Local Time Machine

The Mikael Agricola Society has been involved in the archaeological research project of the
ruins of the Old Cathedral of Vyborg, which has been carried forward together with the
Russian Academy of Sciences, and the Vyborgsky District, and the Department of Museum
Services, under the leadership of Aleksanteri Saksa. The purpose of the project is to study


248 https://www.info-namibia.com/activities-and-places-of-interest/north-central/nakambale-

museum



                                              77
a church built in the Middle Ages, by means of archaeology and construction research.
Viipuri was a school city for Agricola for ten years (1518–1528), and the Turku Bishop, who
was returning from Moscow and Novgorod, with the peace delegation sent by Kustaa
Vaasa, was buried in the Vyborg Cathedral, in 1557. Considering Vyborg Local Time
Machine, there is plenty of material that could be accessed through the networks of the
Mikael Agricola Society. Yle, which was one of the partners of the Agricola anniversary year,
would also have a lot of audiovisual material on Vyborg. Together with the Vyborgsky
District Administration, the society was responsible for the re-establishment of Mikael
Agricola's monument in Vyborg, in June 2009.




                                             78
Conclusions
In the following are proposals on how to proceed with the Time Machine project in Finland.
The proposals are based not only on discussions with organisations during the survey, but
also on the Time Machine Action Plan 249, and the services250 offered by Time Machine
Organisation251 to its members. More specific proposals, for developing the digitalisation
of cultural heritage in TMO member organisations, are described in the "Results" chapter,
for each organisation.

Influencing the Content of the Time Machine Project
Participation in the Time Machine Request for Comments process252 provides the most
direct way to influence the content of the project. It would be desirable, for the most
possible number of Finnish organisations to participate in producing RFC documents in one
way or another: as writers, editors, or reviewers. Organisation experts can directly register
for the RFC process, using the form 253 on the Time Machine website. In practice, it could
make sense for Finnish people involved in the RFC process, to network with each other,
allowing them to coordinate their participation, and offer peer support to each other.

The content of the Time Machine project can also be influenced by participating in
seminars and events organised by the project, such as the annual Time Machine
conference. Finland was strongly represented in the virtual conference held at the end of
2020. Mikko Lappalainen from the National Library of Finland, and Pertti Haapala from the
University of Tampere, talked about their own organisations, during the opening session of
the conference254255. In addition, Juha Henriksson presented the Time Machine in Finland
report, at the final session of the second conference day 256257. As a new operating method,
there are the Time Machine Academies events258, launched in spring 2021.




249 https://www.timemachine.eu/tmo-operational-plan/
250 https://www.timemachine.eu/building-a-time-machine/
251 https://www.timemachine.eu/time-machine-organisation/
252 https://www.timemachine.eu/building-a-time-machine/requests-for-comments/
253 https://www.timemachine.eu/building-a-time-machine/requests-for-comments/participate-in-

the-rfc-process/
254 https://youtu.be/Mdv68IZxIIA
255 https://www.timemachine.eu/tm2020-poster-wall/
256 https://youtu.be/S3kwna6IAF8
257 https://www.timemachine.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/TM2020_Session-

III_presentation.pdf
258 https://www.timemachine.eu/time-machine-academies/




                                             79
The views and wishes of Finnish organisations, can also be brought to the attention of the
TMO central organisation, through the Finnish Time Machine ambassadors259 Tomi
Ahoranta (National Archives of Finland) and Juha Henriksson (Music Archive Finland).

Development of National Infrastructure
The Time Machine project and the development of technology and operating methods
within its framework, may provide opportunities for developing national digital cultural
heritage infrastructures. Finna, used by the majority of Finnish libraries, archives, and
museums, plays a key role here.

Cooperation with Time Machine could help achieve the goals of Finna services vision
2025260. According to the vision, Finna creates solutions for learning and research,
combines information into new entities, and offers intelligent and personalised ways to
retrieve information. Development work carried out in the Time Machine framework, can
help Finna to provide material to use, in new ways. The Finna Street Search and sustainable
development solutions that serve Finna, could be promoted through Time Machine
cooperation, as well. Then, Finna's interfaces can be utilised and further developed, in
order to import metadata from Finnish organisations, into various Local Time Machine
services.

Another key national infrastructure is the Digital Preservation Service for Cultural Heritage
(DPS), which already does international cooperation. Cooperation with Time Machine
would increasingly strengthen the international networking of the DPS. Furthermore,
development work within the TMO framework, could even provide the DPS with new
technologies, for the long-term preservation of digital cultural heritage.

An important part of the Time Machine action plan is the enhancement of mass
digitisation, by developing new technologies and new procedures. In Finland, large-scale
digitisation has been carried out especially by large national actors, such as the National
Archives of Finland, the National Library of Finland, and the Finnish Heritage Agency. For
example, the development of digitisation technology based on X-ray technology, within the
Time Machine framework, could enhance the digitisation of old fragile documents and
books. In the designing of the new national digitisation centre planned for Mikkeli Memory
Campus, cooperation with the Time Machine project could also prove productive.

The development of digitisation technology and methods within Time Machine, also serves
the digitisation projects of smaller Finnish GLAM organisations, as new equipment and
procedures may significantly reduce the costs of digitisation and the amount of human
labour needed.

259 https://www.timemachine.eu/ambassadors/
260 https://www.doria.fi/handle/10024/177027




                                               80
The ontologies of the Finto service261, that promote interoperability and the use of linked
data, could be further developed within the framework of the Time Machine project, for
example through various event and operator ontologies. By increasing the multilingualism
of ontologies, the materials of different language areas could be made more widely
available, and the construction of services across language boundaries would be facilitated.

Local Time Machine Services
According to the survey, Finnish TMO member organisations have several completed or
planned digital cultural heritage projects, involving data harvesting or visualisation of data.
These projects can be proposed to the Local Time Machine register262, which would
increase their visibility. Projects related to a specific location, form the Local Time Machine
entity for the location. Thus, for example, all of the projects located in Turku and listed in
the register, would jointly create the Turku Time Machine. If the projects harvesting data
or visualising data, are not directly related to a specific location or area, they can still be
entered in the LTM register, in which case the address of the organisation's head office is
recorded as the location.

During the survey, several interesting proposals for targets for national Time Machine
services came up, that could be implemented by several Finnish TMO members combining
their expertise, materials, and resources. Many discussions highlighted Suomenlinna,
which is one of Finland's seven World Heritage Sites, and has a long history since 1747, as
part of Sweden, Russia, and independent Finland. TMO members' collections contain a
number of versatile materials related to Suomenlinna, some of which have already been
utilised in various exhibitions263. Some virtual content264 has already been produced from
Suomenlinna, and these could be complemented by a potential Time Machine project.

In addition to Suomenlinna, other old castles, such as Turku Castle, Häme Castle, and
Olavinlinna Castle, were also mentioned in the discussions for the survey. Turku Castle
could be an interesting target in this respect, as there are several members of the Time
Machine organisation in Turku, with international and diverse expertise and interesting
materials (History, Culture, and Arts Studies Archives, Mikael Agricola Society, Paavo Nurmi
Festival, Sibeliusmuseum, Turku University of Applied Sciences, and the University of
Turku). The Culture Campus Turku agreement265, signed in December 2020, could be useful
in terms of the joint project on Turku Castle.

261 https://finto.fi/en/
262 https://www.timemachine.eu/building-a-time-machine/propose-an-ltm-project/
263 An example https://arkisto.fi/news/2782/61/Suomenlinnan-historiaa-kolmen-valtakunnan-

linnoituksena-juhlistetaan-laajalla-näyttelyllä/d,ajankohtaista
264 https://www.suomenlinna.fi/en/
265 https://www.utu.fi/en/news/press-release/culture-campus-turku-to-become-a-new-platform-

for-developing-culture-sector


                                              81
Vyborg was also brought up in several discussions, as a possible target for cooperation.
Material related to Vyborg is available in several Finnish archives. A Time Machine project
on Vyborg, could bring to life the historic city, that has been partly destroyed. In addition,
a virtual approach would significantly promote the availability of cultural heritage related
to Vyborg. Considering the Time Machine project on Vyborg, cooperation should be carried
out with Tampere University of Applied Sciences, which has implemented a Virtual
Vyborg266, that is, 3D modelling of Vyborg as it was in September 1939.

A topical target for possible cooperation between Finnish TMO members, could also be the
Kaustinen Folk Fiddling Tradition267, which has been proposed for UNESCO's
Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. Material related to the
tradition has been stored, for instance, in the Finnish Folk Music Institute, the Tampere
Folklife Archives, the SKS archives, and the Vaasa Provincial Archives.

A Time Machine project related to the Sápmi country would be of international
significance. The Sámi community is Europe's only indigenous community; therefore it
plays a key role in studying the models of sharing Traditional Knowledge, in the digital
world. There are materials related to the Sápmi country in several TMO member
organisations, and the Sámi Archives 268, which operates in the Sámi Cultural Centre
Sajos269, is part of the National Archives of Finland. Several topical themes such as
tolerance, minorities, the relationship with nature, and climate change, could be addressed
in the context of the Sápmi project.

Participation in International Time Machine Projects
Finland has a broad expertise and experience in various projects and technologies related
to digital cultural heritage. For example, the capacity of the LUMI supercomputer270 of the
EuroHPC project located in the CSC Kajaani data centre, and other CSC computational
infrastructure, could be offered for the development of new object recognition methods
and machine learning, in international Time Machine projects.

Finnish TMO members have strong expertise in VR and AR technologies, which provides
good preconditions, not only for the implementation of national LTM services, but for
international cooperation, as well. There have been several interesting projects in the
Turku region, for instance. Turku Game Lab271, the joint venture of the University of Turku


266 http://www.virtuaaliviipuri.tamk.fi/fi
267 https://kaustislainenviulunsoitto.wordpress.com
268 https://arkisto.fi/samiarchives
269 https://www.sajos.fi/frontpage/
270 https://www.lumi-supercomputer.eu/eurohpcju/
271 https://www.turkugamelab.fi




                                               82
and Turku University of Applied Sciences, has been operational since 2009. Turku University
of Applied Sciences has developed a platform and a mobile application for augmented
reality, that allows the user to build places in the terrain and determine the types of tasks,
or media content, associated with them, for example, by using the augmented reality. In
March 2021, a FIT Turku (Futuristic Interactive Technologies) Competence Centre272 was
opened at the facilities of Turku University of Applied Sciences.

The Digimuseo.fi digital museum platform273 has introduced the contents and services of
museums to consumers in a new and inspiring way. Digimuseo.fi type of interactive
implementation is unique at the European level, and therefore, it provides opportunities
for development projects related to Time Machine. Expertise and technology related to the
virtualisation of museums have also been developed in, for example, Digitalia, and Lingsoft
is interested in developing the use of natural language when navigating in the virtual
museum.

The Remote Presence technology274 developed at the Department of Future Technologies
at the University of Turku, and its Future Tech Lab operating at Windhoek in Namibia, offers
entirely new perspectives on how to be present in another location and time. Remote
Presence also enables real-time remote presence. In its progressiveness, Remote Presence
offers several opportunities for international cooperation, even in the framework of the
Time Machine project.

Map-based applications have been developed especially by Citynomadi, which has already
been internationally active. The extensive Genius Loci project entity275 also includes an
interesting combination of locality, humanities and social science research, as well as ICT
development. A current project, combining place and virtuality, is the King's Road
Renascence276, within which the attractions and service networks by the historical King's
Road will be compiled on a new interactive digital platform, where they can be explored
using VR/AR technology.

Description often forms the bottleneck of the digitalisation of cultural heritage. In Finland,
several interesting, automated description projects are under way, which could offer
opportunities for international Time Machine cooperation. The National Library's
automated document description tool Annif277, is already multilingual and is not tied to a



272 https://www.turkuamk.fi/fi/tyoelamapalvelut/palvelut/futuristic-interactive-technologies-fit-

turku/
273 https://digimuseo.fi/en/
274 https://ftlab.utu.fi/projects/remote-presence
275 https://geniusloci.chydenius.fi/index.php?lang=en
276 https://www.xamk.fi/en/research-and-development/kingsroad/
277 https://annif.org




                                                83
specific vocabulary. Annif software has been used in the High Performance Digitisation
project278, as an automated subject indexing and classification tool.

Lingsoft has a great deal of expertise that could add value to various international projects,
which develop Natural Language Processing technologies. The Time Machine network
could also provide an opportunity to further develop the methods produced in the
Methods for Managing Audiovisual (MeMAD) 279 project, to automate the description of
video material.

In addition to the Biografiasampo 280 mentioned on page 51, the Semantic Computing
Research Group (SeCo)281 has published several other digital humanities "Sampos" for use
of researchers and the general public.
     • CultureSampo282: Finnish culture on the semantic web
     • TravelSampo283: Mobile cultural tourism service
     • Kirjasampo284 (“BookSampo”): Finnish fiction on the semantic web
     • WarSampo285: Winter and Continuation War on the semantic web
     • AcademySampo286: Finnish academic people 1640–1899
     • NameSampo287: Workbench for onomastics researcher
     • WarVictimSampo288 1914–1922

Sampo services offer many opportunities from the perspective of Finnish Time Machine
activities – both internationally, and in terms of LTM projects. In addition to the
aforementioned, a FindSampo (archaeology and citizen science), LawSampo (semantic
Finlex of the Ministry of Justice), and ParliamentSampo (parliamentary data) are under
development. The methodological basis for the Sampos, is the Sampo model, based on the
technologies of the semantic web and the idea of linked data, and the Sampo UI
programming framework, for the implementation of the user interfaces.

Furthermore, it may be possible to participate in international Time Machine projects, by
offering them materials, that can be used to test the technology and services developed in

278 https://www.digime.fi/2020/09/29/high-performance-digitisation-hankkeella-vauhtia-

digitaalisten-aineistojen-kuvailuun/
279 https://memad.eu
280 https://biografiasampo.fi
281 https://seco.cs.aalto.fi
282 http://www.kulttuurisampo.fi/?lang=en
283 https://seco.cs.aalto.fi/applications/travelsampo/
284 http://www.kirjasampo.fi
285 https://www.sotasampo.fi/en/
286 https://akatemiasampo.fi/en/
287 https://nimisampo.fi/en/
288 https://sotasurmat.narc.fi/en/




                                                 84
the projects. Extremely extensive cultural heritage materials are available especially with
large national operators, such as the National Library of Finland, the National Archives of
Finland, and the National Museum of Finland, but interesting and versatile digital materials
are also available with other Finnish TMO member organisations. These materials are
described in more detail for each organisation in the "Results" chapter.




                                            85
Appendix: Questionnaire

Not all questions need to be answered – just answer those that are relevant to your
organisation.

Answers may be preliminary. In any case, a video discussion will be held with all Finnish
TMO members on the basis of these questions. One to four people can participate in the
discussion on your behalf.

Questions:

1. What systems or services do you already have that could be brought into the Time
Machine entity?
1.1. Data (e.g. digitisation, data modelling, long-term preservation)
1.2. Data processing (e.g. object and text recognition, AI, visualisation, Super Computing)
1.3. Theory (e.g. related subjects, such as Digital Humanities)

1.4. What new could be built on the before-mentioned systems within the Time Machine
framework?

1.5. How can the before-mentioned systems and services be utilised to create joint TMO
services, i.e. a part of the TMO infrastructure?

2. What plans do you have for entirely new systems and information services, that could
be integrated into the Time Machine entity, and thus be covered by e.g. EU funding?
2.1. Data (e.g. digitisation, data modelling, long-term preservation)
2.2. Data processing (e.g. object and text recognition, AI, visualisation, Super Computing)
2.3. Theory (e.g. related subjects, such as Digital Humanities)

3. What kind of thoughts do you have about a potential Finnish Local Time Machine
(LTM)?
3.1. A joint Time Machine for the entire Finland?
3.2. Location-bound LTM?
3.3. LTM based on a specific theme entity?
3.4. LTM targeted at a specific user group?
3.5. Something else?

4. What could you offer for the designing/implementation of the Finnish Local Time
Machine?
4.1. Materials
4.2. Services and IT systems
4.3. Expertise
4.4. Something else?


                                            86
5. What are your wishes from the perspective of future Time Machine users?
5.1. Promoting research
5.2. Promoting education
5.3. Promoting the activities of GLAM organisations
5.4. Something else (e.g. creative industry, urban planning, smart tourism)

6. What are your wishes regarding the TMO research?

7. What kind of cooperation would you prefer with other Finnish TMO members?

8. What else do you want to bring up?




                                          87
