The Local Time Machine Project Network
  A Practical and Conceptual Overview
            Zane Putnina | PhD programme in Heritage Studies
   Supervisor: Prof. Dr. Christer Petersen | Chair of Applied Media Studies
                       Time Machine Conference 2021
                                23.11.2021.
Structure of Lightning Talk


1. Research Questions


2. Survey Questionnaire


3. Planned Outcome
Research Questions

Part I – A practical overview
1. What are the countries, academic fields and types of projects represented in the Local Time
Machine (LTM) project network?
2. What are the LTM projects objectives, histories, tools used and planned impacts thus far?


Part II – A conceptual overview
3. What is digital Cultural Heritage? What is digital Cultural Heritage as practiced within the LTM
project network?
4. How does digital Cultural Heritage differ from previous media modes of heritage memory
construction? What are the implications thereof?
The «Travelling Memories» (Erll 2011) Concept

1. Carriers (the people who tell a memory);
2. Media (the tools who tell a memory, after Siegfried J. Schmidt’s);
        - communication instrument (language, pictures, etc.);
        - a technological device;
        - the social dimensions of devices (publishing house, etc.);
        - media offers, the result effect of all the components;
3. Contents (the stories that are told within a memory);
4. Practices (the rituals of how a memory is being told, can be accessed) and
5. Forms (condensed symbols, icons or schemata appearing within a memory).
Structure of the survey questionnaire


Section 1 - general LTM project questions are shortly asked.

Section 2 - questions related to the five dimensions of the analogue
heritage memory source are asked.                                          «Travelling
                                                                           Memories»
Section 3 - questions related to the five dimensions of the digital
LTM project are asked.

Section 4 - lastly, further contact possibilities will be inquired upon.
Planned Outcome

With the overarching aim of contributing to the TMO strategic action Pillar One – critical theory
for digital Cultural Heritage – this project will result in:

- A comprehensive study on the beginnings of the collaborative digital Cultural Heritage 4D
  Mirror World endeavour (RQ1 and 2);

- A working definition as to what is digital Cultural Heritage within the LTM project network
  (RQ3);

- A map of the move of largely analogue heritage memory sources into digital environments
  (RQ4);

- And an analysis of the implications thereof (RQ4).
Link to the survey : https://www.b-tu.de/umfragen/index.php/952185?lang=en


QR code to the survey:




                                                                 Thank you immensely!
                                                                             Zane Putnina
                                                                 Zane.Putnina@b-tu.de
